 PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Media Bias by the Numbers: Challenges and Opportunitiesin the Empirical Study of Partisan News Tim Groeling Department of Communication Studies, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095; email: groeling@ucla.edu Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013. 16:129–51 First published online as a Review in Advance on February 28, 2013 The Annual Review of Political Science is online at http://polisci.annualreviews.org This article’s doi: 10.1146/annurev-polisci-040811-115123 Copyright c/circlecopyrt2013 by Annual Reviews. All rights reservedKeywords gatekeeping bias, content bias, slant, mass media, skew, Fox News, objectivity, ethics Abstract Partisan bias in the news is a perennial matter of concern and debate for scholars, journalists, politicians, and citizens. Although there are abundant opinions about the magnitude, direction, and even existence of media bias,producing a scholarly consensus on the issue has proven difﬁcult for several reasons. In particular, scholars studying media bias empirically must over- come problems of subjectivity, strategic behavior by the actors involved inthe process, and especially the absence of suitable baselines against which to assess bias. This article reviews some approaches to studying media bias and explores several promising strategies and tools scholars have developedto help overcome these obstacles. I conclude with suggestions for future research in the area. 129 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 It’s no surprise to anyone who pays attention that mainstream media tilt their coverage in favor of Democrats and leftish ideas. But it’s not conﬁned to endless puff pieces about the president, or the ignoring of unpleasantfacts. Often, it’s more subtle—as when the general thrust of a news story advances a particular narrative even when the facts within the story don’t really support it. For that sort of thing, you have to go to the acknowledged experts, the reporters and editors of The New York Times. Reynolds (2012) [T]he story here isn’t that Fox News leans right. Everyone knows the channel pushes a conservative-friendly version of the news. Everyone who’s been paying attention has known that since the channel’s inception more than a decade ago. The real story, and the real danger posed by the cable outlet, is that over time Fox News stopped simply leaning to the right and instead became an open and active political player, sort of one-part characterassassin and one-part propagandist, depending on which party was in power. And that the operation thrives on fabrications and falsehoods. Boehlert (2011) The notion of a neutral “mainstream” national media gained a dominant following only in World War II and in its aftermath, when what turned out to be a temporary moderate consensus came to govern the country. Still, the notion of a neutral, nonpartisan mainstream press was, to me at least, worth holding onto. Now it’s prettymuch dead, at least as the public sees things. Fineman (2005) INTRODUCTION Are the news media politically biased? The question is simple to pose but surprisingly difﬁcult to answer. Or at least, difﬁcult to answer well. There is certainly no shortage of opinions on the subject. Books (mostly from ﬁgures outside of academia) purporting to answer the questionhave repeatedly shot to the top of the bestseller lists. 1Networks of online media watchdogs and websites have sprung up to scour each day’s news content for errors, slights, or other malfeasance and trumpet their ﬁndings ( Figure 1 ). Viewers of basic cable comedy shows like The Daily Show orThe Colbert Report can count on a regular dose of media criticism along with their fake news. And of course, accusations of media bias were a go-to line for politicians (particularly on the right) even before Vice President Spiro Agnew complained of the “nattering nabobs of negativity” in the media. In the 2012 election cycle, Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney indicated that he “didn’t expect a fair ﬁght in the media, saying he believed most commentators on televisionwere liberals” (Murray 2012). Even the most powerful man in the world has dabbled in media criticism; President Obama remarked in a 2010 interview on the “tradition in this country of a press that oftentimes is opinionated. The golden age of an objective press was a pretty narrowspan of time in our history. Before that, you had folks like Hearst who used their newspapers very intentionally to promote their viewpoints. I think Fox is part of that tradition—it is part of the tradition that has a very clear, undeniable point of view. It’s a point of view that I disagree with.It’s a point of view that I think is ultimately destructive for the long-term growth of a country that has a vibrant middle class and is competitive in the world” (Wenner 2010). 2 1Two of the most successful of these books were Bernard Goldberg’s Bias: A CBS Insider Exposes How the Media Distort the News (2001) and Al Franken’s Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right (2003), which each spent several weeks at the top of the New York Times nonﬁction bestseller lists. Both books present primarily anecdotal evidence and include chapter titles like “How About a Media that Reﬂects America,” “Paul Gigot is Unable to Defend an Incredibly Stupid Wall Street Journal Editorial,” “Where Thieves and Pimps Run Free,” and “Bill O’Reilly: Lying, SplotchyBully.” Matching the chapters to their respective authors is left as an exercise for the reader. 2Although his ﬂagship news network’s slogan is “Fair and Balanced,” Fox Chairman and CEO Rupert Murdoch has personally tended to have a very clear point of view in politics. For example, after the Romney campaign responded negatively to criticism 130 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Figure 1 Is media criticism a growth industry? Faith in the fairness and accuracy of the news media has also dropped precipitously among regular citizens. According to Pew (2011), whereas a clear majority (55%) of Americans trusted the news media to “get their facts straight” in 1985, only one in four Americans feel the same way now. Similarly, in 1985, 34% of Americans trusted news organizations to deal fairly with all sidesin “presenting the news dealing with political and social issues,” but less than half that percentage (16%) trusted them to do the same in 2011 (see Figure 2 ). According to the same July 2011 poll, nearly two-thirds of respondents agreed that news organizations were “politically biased in theirreporting” (versus 45% in 1985). The public might largely have made up its mind, but the scholarly community is still very much undecided on the question of whether partisan bias in the news media truly exists. More to thepoint of this article, there is still a great deal of uncertainty about how to best approach answering the question empirically. of the candidate in Murdoch’s Twitter account, he somewhat defensively tweeted, “Romney people upset at me! Of course I want him to win, save us from socialism, etc. but should listen to good advice and get stuck in!” (Murdoch 2012). www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 131 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 y = –0.0022x + 116.68 R2 = 0.63382 y = –0.0018x + 88.991 R2 = 0.82514 0102030405060 July 1985  January 1986 Percent of Americans who trusted the media to... July 1986  January 1987  July 1987  January 1988  July 1988  January 1989  July 1989  January 1990  July 1990  January 1991  July 1991  January 1992  July 1992  January 1993  July 1993  January 1994  July 1994  January 1995  July 1995  January 1996  July 1996  January 1997  July 1997  January 1998  July 1998  January 1999  July 1999  January 2000  July 1900  January 2001  July 2001  January 2002  July 2002  January 2003  July 2003  January 2004  July 2004  January 2005  July 2005  January 2006  July 2006  January 2007  July 2007  January 2008  July 2008  January 2009  July 2009  January 2010  July 2010  January 2011  July 2011 Get the facts straight Deal fairly with all sides Figure 2 Decreasing public trust in the news media. This review is intended to help the reader understand and appreciate some of the best empirical explorations of media bias and the recent evolution of the work in the area. I begin by clarifying some key terms and concepts, and in particular clarifying the distinction between selection bias and presentation bias. Next, I discuss some of the major obstacles researchers have faced in deﬁnitivelytesting for the presence or absence of media bias. Although scholars confront numerous obstacles in studying media bias, I identify two particularly vexing problems: subjectivity and the so-called “unobserved population” problem. Next, I examine current examples of bias research, includingsome that do a particularly good job addressing the research challenges identiﬁed earlier. I conclude by discussing some potential future avenues for researchers in the area of media bias. Before I start, it is important to understand the limitations of this article, which is focused narrowly on empirical measures of partisan bias in news media. As such, its purpose is not to deﬁnitively answer whether the media are biased in favor of a particular party. Similarly, it excludes discussion of the causes or effects of media bias. Finally, for brevity’s sake, I concentrate my analysison more recent studies of partisan media bias in the United States (although many of the general concepts discussed here should also readily apply to other contexts). WHAT IS MEDIA BIAS? Some deﬁnitions of bias focus on the mental processes or attitudes of individuals, viewing it as synonymous with “prejudice” or, in the case of news media, “the inﬂuence of journalists’ belief 132 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 OTHER DEFINITIONS OF BIAS Dictionary.reference.com: Noun “2. a particular tendency or inclination, especially one that prevents unprejudiced consideration of a question; prejudice.” Noun “3. Statistics: a systematic as opposed to a random distortion of a statistic as a result of sampling procedure.” Verb “9. to cause partiality or favoritism in (a person); inﬂuence,especially unfairly.” Stevenson et al. (1973): “ ...we decided to conceptualize bias as imbalance or inequality of coverage rather than as a departure from truth. While the latter deﬁnition can be used in some circumstances, it did not seem possibleor useful to try to develop a ‘true’ picture of the campaign to compare with CBS’ version.” (p. 213) Waldman & Devitt (1998): “Bias can be deﬁned as any systematic slant favoring one candidate or ideology over another.” (p. 302) Gentzkow & Shapiro (2006): “All the accounts are based on the same set of underlying facts. Yet by selective omission, choice of words, and varying credibility ascribed to the primary source, each conveys a radically differentimpression of what actually happened. The choice to slant information in this way is what we will mean in this paper by media bias.” (p. 281) Entman (2007): Content bias is deﬁned as “consistent patterns in the framing of mediated communication that promote the inﬂuence of one side in conﬂicts over the use of government power.” (p. 166) systems on the texts they produce” (Entman 2010). 3However, as I argue below, even if an individual or a news organization favors one partisan entity over another in their political view, the existence of a political opinion is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient to justify the conclusion that the news theyproduce would be biased. Instead, in order to effectively test for the presence of bias in the news, it seems clear that one must somehow examine the characteristics of that news. (See sidebar, “Other Deﬁnitions of Bias.”) In this analysis, I deﬁne media bias as a portrayal of reality that is signiﬁcantly and systematically (not randomly) distorted. Under this general deﬁnition, there are countless dimensions along which one might test for media bias, including portrayals of race, geography, class, etc. However,for purposes of this investigation, I limit the analysis to the subset of media bias that is chieﬂy concerned with relative treatment of American political parties: thus, I deﬁne partisan media bias as a signiﬁcantly distorted portrayal of reality that systematically and disproportionately favorsone party over the other. Note that this deﬁnition requires that the researcher establish that any bias in coverage is systematic, rather than anecdotal, episodic, or ﬂeeting. 4It also requires that the portrayal in the news be distorted in its portrayal of reality in some signiﬁcant way. Finally, it requires that the distortion favor one of the parties over the other. News coverage can become distorted through two main categories of choices by newsmakers: which events or information to cover, and how to cover them. I refer to systematically distorted decisions in these areas as selection bias and presentation bias, respectively (also see sidebar, “D’Alessio & Allen’s Typology of Media Bias”). 3For studies of the characteristics and ideologies of American journalists, see Shaw (1985), Lichter et al. (1986), Weaver & Wilhoit (1991, 1996, 2007), Pew (2004, 2005), and Cohen (2010). 4Media criticism of the sort that appears on watchdog websites and popular outlets like The Daily Show is—almost by deﬁnition—episodic and anecdotal. Such analyses seem to be using the legal doctrine of falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus , which holds that “a witness who willfully falsiﬁes one matter is not credible on any matter” ( http://deﬁnitions.uslegal.com/ f/falsus-in-uno-falsus-in-omnibus/ ). www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 133 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 D’ALESSIO & ALLEN’S TYPOLOGY OF MEDIA BIAS In an inﬂuential review of the campaign media bias literature, D’Alessio & Allen (2000) present a helpful typology of media bias. They deﬁne and analyze gatekeeping bias (“the preference for selecting stories from one party or the other”); coverage bias, which “considers the relative amounts of coverage each party receives;” and statement bias,“which focuses on the favorability of coverage toward one party or the other” (p. 133). Their concepts map closely to the ones put forth here, but were chosen to describe methodological approaches in (and limitations of) the existing literature rather than to distinguish categories of choices by news producers. Forexample, their conception of gatekeeping bias is explicitly limited to “stories that were picked up by media outlets in the ﬁrst place” and wonder, “What of stories that remained unreported? Is there bias, not in the selection of stories, but in the rejection of stories?” (p. 150). The broader use of “selection bias” here is intended to capture such decisions more cleanly. Similarly, coverage bias explicitly assumes that a 50–50 split in coverage between the parties constitutes fair coverage, which seems “impossible to measure” outside electoral politics, as the authors note (p. 136). And ﬁnally, statement bias seems to exclude other methods of tilting story content—framing, visuals, issue focus, etc. Selection Bias News organizations never have the time, personnel, funding, or bandwidth necessary to present all possible stories and must therefore choose to cover a subset of possible stories. As Hamilton(2006) has observed, the choice of what information will be selected to be marketed as news is perhaps the single most fundamental decision in journalism. Much like the problem of selection bias or biased sampling in statistics or survey research, selection bias occurs when not all units in the target population are equally likely to be included, either because they are not sought out by news organizations or are not published when available. As Groeling & Kernell (1998)note, if “news gatherers systematically draw an unrepresentative sample from the population of...[possible] news stories, this practice alone might sufﬁce to skew ...coverage” (p. 1,067). (See sidebar, “Gatekeeping in Action.”) Building on my deﬁnition of partisan media bias, the deﬁnitionof partisan selection bias is choosing news stories that present a signiﬁcantly distorted sample of reality that systematically and disproportionately favors one party over the other. Presentation Bias Whereas selection bias skews the choices of what events or information to cover, presentation bias skews the content of those resulting stories. Presentation bias is the focus of the vast majority of the media bias literature.5As discussed below, scholars have analyzed the content of stories across a dizzying array of dimensions, including the sources present, tone, framing, issues, visual dimension,length, ordering, etc. I deﬁne partisan presentation bias as composing news stories in a manner that presents a signiﬁcantly distorted view of reality, which systematically and disproportionately favors one party over the other. Examples of Selection and Presentation Bias Table 1 helps explain these concepts using hypothetical examples. Assume there are two news- worthy events, Events 1 and 2, originating in Congress on a given day. For now, let us set aside 5Some story elements might themselves be analyzable as a form of selection bias, such as when a show selects one source to appear in a story but not others. 134 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 GATEKEEPING IN ACTION “Politics is one area frequently dominated by the publisher’s policy, therefore by our deﬁnition, staffers observe this policy. And observe it they did—with a few interesting exceptions. In one case, a staffer ...substituting as wire editor on the latter’s night off omitted a story about a political sacred cow of the paper. The staffer never againwas given this once-a-week job (which was considered a plum, bearing promise of advancement). That a publisher maintains his policy when he wants to is also shown in this story, told by an ‘insider’ in a city where the chain paper in question is published: ‘Mac is political editor [of the chain paper]. Now his boss is committed to the ...[political] gang in town. Mac is supposed to go along. But we’re watching his stuff pretty carefully. We pretty soon get the hunch that old Mac is getting cute—not giving us a break at all. He doesn’t play up our boys any more than he does the others. Some pal. So Clarence, one of the boys, starts keeping a scrapbook on all of Mac’s stuff. He gets a bookful (sic) after about three-four months, and sends it along to — [the regional chain publisher]. That took care of Mac. (What happened?) You should have seen the change. The very next day, Mac is phoning around, makingdates for interviews with the boys. He even went up to Congressman A.’s house, the following morning before breakfast, so as to be sure and have something in that day’s paper. He’s been on the ball ever since.” (Breed 1952, pp. 350–51) the issue of what constitutes newsworthiness and assume 1 is more newsworthy and 2 is less so. In the example, each event is also assumed to beneﬁt one party or the other some arbitrary amount ifreported accurately. For this example, Event 1 is assumed to strongly beneﬁt Democrats and harm Republicans; Event 2 is equivalently beneﬁcial to both parties. If we are considering these two events to be the only two available partisan stories for the day (the “full population”), this appearsto have been a good day for Democrats, since the most newsworthy event strongly beneﬁts them and harms Republicans, and neither event harms them. Table 1 Story criteria and examples Partisan beneﬁts of two eventsFavors which party? Population of possible stories Event #1: More important. Awful for Republicans (R), great for Democrats (D)Event #2: Less important. OK for R, OK for DD Criterion? Resulting story A. “Structural” (nonpartisan) selection bias#1: Awful for R, great for D D B. Pro-R partisan selection bias#2: OK for R, OK for D Neutral C. Pro-D partisan selection bias#1: Awful for R, great for D D D. Pro-R partisan presentation bias#1: Awful for R, OK for D D E. Severe pro-R partisan presentation bias#1: Great for R, awful for D R F. Pro-D presentation bias #1: Awful for R, great for D D www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 135 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 If a news organization chose to report the full population of newsworthy events, it would present stories about both events, giving the Democrats better coverage overall than Republicans.However, as noted above, no news organization can devote the resources necessary to cover every single potential story, so the remaining rows of Table 1 offer some criteria through which we might analyze those choices. Beginning with Row A, if we assume only the single most newsworthy story will be cho- sen by the news organization, it should choose to cover Event 1. Note that choosing only the most newsworthy stories is itself a form of selection bias (less newsworthy events are sys- tematically excluded from the sample), but not partisan selection bias. Hofstetter (1976) re- ferred to this as structural bias, in which “some things are selected to be reported ratherthan other things because of the character of the medium or because of the incentives that apply to commercial news programming instead of partisan prejudices held by newsmen” (p. 34). Note, however, that the choice shown in Row A might lead to allegations of pro-Democratic bias on the part of the news organization. Because Event 1 is much more favorable for Democrats than the ignored event, such charges would have face validity, since the story that could be shownwould be unrepresentative of the events occurring that day in a way that beneﬁted a particular political party. Kuklinski & Sigelman (1992) discuss a similar problem, noting that changes in the political environment can systematically increase the newsworthiness of one party over anotherand produce news that favors one party over the other through objective news gathering and selection (the “paradox of objectivity”). However, because the choices would be proportionate to each party’s underlying newsworthiness, this type of selection bias would still not qualify aspartisan selection bias. The next two rows of Table 1 consider instances of partisan selection bias that favor Re- publicans (Row B) and Democrats (Row C), respectively. In Row B, the pro-Republican news organization has chosen to ignore Event 1, the more newsworthy event, in favor of one that bene- ﬁts both parties equivalently. It is important to note that researchers examining the story for signsof partisan presentation bias would ﬁnd none, as the story does not misrepresent the event in any way, and the two parties are treated equivalently in its content. Nonetheless, the choice to select this story over the more newsworthy option has the effect of changing a bad day for Republicansinto one that beneﬁts neither party. In contrast, if a news organization were to favor Democrats over Republicans in its choices of what events to cover (Row C), it would choose Event 1, making it indistinguishable from anorganization using more objective, structural story criteria, at least in this day’s coverage. These examples highlight how vital it is for media bias researchers to have some understanding of the underlying population of possible stories, which could then be used to evaluate the choices ofnews organizations. In all the cases discussed so far, news organizations differ in what events they have chosen to cover, but they accurately present information about the chosen events. In the next two hypothet-icals, we consider situations where a news organization has chosen to cover the more newsworthy event but has skewed its story in a way that favors Republicans. In the case of pro-Republican partisan presentation bias (Row D in Table 1 ), the story about Event 1 is “spun” in such a way as to reduce the value of the story for Democrats while still accurately conveying its harmful im- plications for Republicans. Even though the story still favors Democrats overall, its presentationhas diminished the degree to which the story beneﬁts them and is thus an example of partisan presentation bias. Next, Row E takes up a more severe case of pro-Republican partisan presentation bias. In this case, the news organization is still choosing to report the most newsworthy story of the day but 136 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 does so in a way that fundamentally misrepresents the event, changing it from one that strongly favors Democrats to one that strongly beneﬁts Republicans. Finally, in Row F, we examine how a pro-Democratic news organization might present the news of the day. As we saw in Row C, such efforts might actually be indistinguishable from scrupulously neutral reporting, since the most newsworthy event is already massively beneﬁcialto Democrats and damaging to their opponents, so all that is necessary to beneﬁt Democrats is to accurately report it. Table 1 highlights some of the difﬁculties researchers face in trying to empirically test for media bias. Even in a simpliﬁed hypothetical case where we know the “true” newsworthiness and partisan impact of stories, it is sometimes difﬁcult to distinguish between news choices that arenonpartisan and those that favor a party (note that the predicted stories generated by nonpartisan and pro-Democratic journalists are equivalent here in rows A, C, and F). And as I discuss in the next section, real-world empirical research into media bias faces far more severe challenges thanthis simple hypothetical. CHALLENGES FACING RESEARCHERS TESTING FOR MEDIA BIAS Beyond mundane problems such as securing access to news content, the difﬁculty and expense ofmounting a major content analysis, and getting such research placed in top journals, researchersface two main challenges: the unobserved population problem and subjectivity. The Problem of the Unobserved Population When faced with allegations of media bias, journalists and news organizations often defend them-selves by arguing that their coverage was a fair representation of reality and that the accuser is just unhappy about the true state of the world. [As comedian Stephen Colbert (2006) sarcasti- cally put it, “reality has a well-known liberal bias.”] Longtime CBS Evening News anchor Walter Cronkite famously said, “Our job is only to hold up the mirror—to tell and show the public what has happened. Then it is the job of the people to decide whether they have faith in their leaders or governments” (quoted in Alan & Lane 2003, pp. 139–40). As it turns out, the “mirror” claim is actually quite difﬁcult to address empirically. In most cases, only the news organizations that assembled the stories are aware of the potential stories that were not selected for distribution. Outside observers—especially prior to the advent of newmedia—could only view the ﬁnal product of the newsgathering process; any “raw material” that ended up on the cutting-room ﬂoor was part of an unobserved population. Table 2 sets out another hypothetical example of news content to help illustrate this point. Here we see a week’s worth of news from a hypothetical news provider presented in a format similar to Table 1 . A cursory glance at Table 2 would suggest that coverage favored the Democrats (ﬁve days’ coverage favored them, one favored Republicans, and one was neutral). However, theresearcher would have no idea from what “true” population of news these stories were selected, so there would be no way to tell whether the selection of these stories exhibited partisan bias. As Groeling & Kernell (1998, p. 1,067) put it, “research based exclusively on content analysis of reported news commits the fallacy of drawing inferences from data that has been selected on the dependent variable. The issue of selection bias presents this research with a serious conundrum.How can it assess the representativeness of the sample when the population is comprised mostly of stories that were never reported and thereby elude observation?” D’Alessio & Allen (2000) made a similar point when they pessimistically concluded that such biases might be unknowable. “If one considers the universe of all stories as a population and the www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 137 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Table 2 Unobserved population example: week of news from hypothetical news organization Partisan impact Favors which party? Population of possible stories? ? ? Day Story presented Day 1 Neutral for R, neutral for D Neutral Day 2 OK for R, awful for D R Day 3 Awful for R, OK for D D Day 4 Awful for R, great for D D Day 5 Bad for R, neutral for D D Day 6 Neutral for R, great for D D Day 7 Awful for R, OK for D D Abbreviations: R, Republicans; D, Democrats. list of those that are covered as a sample, the presumption is that, because the ‘sampling’ procedure is carried out by individuals with opinions, the selection therefore will be biased. This is only a presumption, however, as the ‘population’ is not only unknowable but unidentiﬁable. What would be ‘all the news in the world?’ And, in the absence of population data, although it is safe to presume that gatekeeping bias occurs, it is impossible to know, or even estimate, its magnitude” (p. 136). Not knowing the objective underlying characteristics of the events selected for coverage also undermines the ability of researchers to assess partisan presentation bias. In much of the literature on media bias, researchers have “solved” this problem by assuming that the parties are equivalently advantaged and that truly unbiased coverage should be “balanced.” And in fact, there are contextsin which this assumption might be more justiﬁed than others. As D’Alessio & Allen (2000) suggest, “...a two-party system, which produces two essentially qualiﬁed candidates, each campaigning at roughly the same level, should produce events, activities, and discussion in two roughly equalamounts. Thus, coverage should be roughly equal for each side, and any departure from a ‘50–50’ split could be considered a consequence of some kind of bias” (p. 137). Studies covering much longer historical time frames, which might be expected to cover a broader range of institutionaland situational variation, might also be expected to be reasonably balanced. However, as Schiffer (2006) notes, “deviation from the balance baseline that results from non- partisan, non-ideological aspects of the newsmaking process will spuriously appear as partisanslant. ...At ﬁrst glance, this problem appears intractable. After all, if balance fails as a suitable baseline, then how does one calculate an expected coverage premium for a given reality condi- tion? ...[T]he lack of a feasible solution makes the balance baseline no less problematic” (p. 24; see also Niven 2003 on this point). And Druckman & Parkin (2005) provide a baleful summary of the issue, concluding that “one of the prime lessons of research on media slant or bias concernsthe futility of searching for an ‘objective’ standard by which to assess bias. These studies suggest that the most effective strategy is to instead focus on relative comparisons of coverage” (p. 1,031). The Subjectivity Problem The problem of subjectivity and its consequences are comparatively well known, especially to researchers who must train human coders to reliably and uniformly conduct content analyses. Perhaps the most famous example of such subjectivity is the “hostile media” phenomenon, in which identical stories were perceived as having diametrically opposed biases depending on whoviewed them (Vallone et al. 1985). 138 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Particularly in the case of media bias, differing perceptions of story content might arise from differences in the content of news, or they might instead reﬂect prior attitudes regarding the biasof that source. Because of well-documented cognitive biases—such as conﬁrmation and disconﬁr- mation biases, selective perception, anchoring, attention bias, and the clustering illusion, among others—partisans might sincerely perceive news as being biased against their preferred stance,even when it is actually unbiased (see Hastorf & Cantril 1954, Dalton et al. 1998). Baum & Gussin (2007) experimentally altered a news story to appear to have originated from different outlets, including CNN and Fox. They found that “merely by varying the identifying information in a news report from that of an outlet perceived as liberal (conservative) to one perceived as con- servative (liberal), we induced participants to evaluate the report’s content as signiﬁcantly moreconservative (liberal)” (p. 26). Turner (2007) reports similar results in a separate study. The problem is exacerbated by the tendency of partisans to strategically allege bias. When a political ﬁgure is perceived to be the victim of biased coverage from a news organization, harmfulmessages from that organization are discounted and favorable messages are perceived as particu- larly credible (Baum & Groeling 2009). VandeHei & Allen (2012) argue in an article on bias in the 2012 campaign, “Republicans cry ‘bias’ so often it feels like a campaign theme. It is, largelybecause it ﬁres up conservatives and diminishes the punch of legitimate investigative or narrative journalism.” Several studies (Watts et al. 1999, Smith 2010, Ladd 2012) suggest that elite criti- cism of the news media (particularly from conservative elites) has contributed directly to increasedperceptions of media bias. The variable interpersonal interpretations of partisan messages might undermine the external validity of content analysis schemes attempting to quantify whether individual statements help orharm partisan ﬁgures. As Zeldes et al. (2008) note, “even in the event that subjective qualities such as tone achieve reliability within a study, it is unclear whether such reliability is transferable to other researchers doing other studies. Moreover, it is unclear how researcher judgments of tone correspond to the way average news consumers would judge [it]” (p. 569). 6 Along these same lines, Groeling & Kernell (1998, pp. 1,065–67) ask: What constitutes good and bad news, and does the content analysis measure what it purports to measure? In the absence of some independent test of validity (Campbell and Stanley 1971), the researcher is left with the task of defending one set of arbitrary coding rules against alternatives that yield different distributions of good and bad ...news, and hence, different conclusions about bias. [Another] less frequently noted problem with subjectivity arises from the aggregation of disparate news items. ... [S]ome news stories are more important than others. Yet in tallying favorable and unfavorable news stories, content analyses typically count them all to be the same. ...Content analyses of news bias understandably shy away from this exercise. ...These problems of subjectivity—reliability, validity, and weighting—point to the same moral: even the most ingenious content analysis has difﬁculty warding off methodological critiques that threaten to impugn its results. STRATEGIES FOR MEASURING MEDIA BIAS In this section, I discuss strategies scholars studying media bias have used to address the method- ological concerns raised above ( Table 3 summarizes major studies and ﬁndings). I focus primarily 6Indeed, the content analysis of one of the most widely publicized efforts to quantify media bias—Edith Efron’s The News Twisters (1971)—could not be replicated by subsequent researchers (Stevenson et al. 1973). www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 139 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Table 3 Quick summary of recent empirical studies of partisan bias Study (data source) Sample Main ﬁnding Aday 2010 (broadcast & cable TV)“This study analyzed a census of stories about Iraq and Afghanistan aired on NBC Nightly News and FNC’s Special Report With Brit Hume (the main evening news program for that network) during 2005.” (p. 148)“...overall the news actually underplayed bad news from both countries. Fox News was much more sympathetic to the administration than NBC. ...” (p. 144) Banning & Coleman 2009 (broadcast TV news)“Researchers made videotape recordings from September 5, Labor Day, to November 7, Election Day, 2000 of the evening news for the three major networks, ABC, CBS, and NBC.” (p. 8)“There was slightly more evidence of the visuals favoring the Republican rather than the Democrat.” (p. 4) Barrett & Barrington 2005 (newspaper— photos)“Photographs of candidates were collected from seven different newspapers covering seven different statewide and local races during both the 1998 and 2002 election cycles.” (p. 611)“candidates endorsed by a particular newspaper—or whose political leanings match the political atmosphere of a given paper—generally have more favorable photographs of thempublished than their opponents.” (p. 609) Barrett & Peake 2007 (newspaper)“To examine local coverage of presidential domestic travel, we content coded local newspaper coverage of George W. Bush’s 2001 domestic trips.” (p. 7)“Other factors discovered to affect either the amount or tone of local coverage include the availability of adversarial sources, whether a newspaper has a Democratic editorial bent. ...” (p. 3) Baum & Groeling 2008 (wire services, Internet news)“We collected all stories from Reuters’ and AP’s ‘top political news’ sections. We then investigated whether a given story was also chosen to appear on each wire’s top news page (indicating greater perceived newsworthiness than those that were not chosen) and compared thewires’ editorial choices to those of more partisan blogs (from the left: DailyKos.com; from the right: FreeRepublic.com) and cable outlets (FoxNews.com).” (p. 345) “We content analyzed the features of each story appearing on the news wires for a 5-month period ( July through November 2006).” (pp. 346–47)“We ﬁnd evidence of greater partisan ﬁltering for the latter three Web sources, and relatively greater reliance on traditional newsworthiness criteria for the news wires.” (p. 345) Butler & Schoﬁeld 2010 (newspaper)“After each newspaper was randomly assigned into one of the two treatments, the appropriate letters were submitted via email and online submission forms on Monday, October 20, and Tuesday,October 21, 2008.” (p. 362)“The authors ﬁnd, contrary to what charges of a liberal media bias would suggest, that newspapers expressed more interest in pro-McCain letters than pro-Obama letters. Furthermore, it wasfound that papers were most likely to be interested in letters supporting the candidate they did not endorse, a result that is consistent with the idea that editors seem to be using theirgatekeeping powers to allow dissenting opinions to be heard.” (p. 356) Covert & Wasburn 2007 (magazines)“This research focuses on Time ,Newsweek ,National Review ,a n d Progressive coverage of several issues that remained prominent in the United States between 1975 and 2000.” (p. 694)“Data provide little support for those claiming signiﬁcant media bias in either ideological direction.” (p. 690) 140 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Gentzkow & Shapiro 2010 (newspaper)“To measure news slant, we examine the set of all phrases used by members of Congress in the 2005 Congressional Record, and identify those that are used much more frequently by one party than byanother. We then index newspapers by the extent to which the use of politically charged phrases in their news coverage resembles the use of the same phrases in the speech of a congressional Democrat orRepublican. ...Our automated procedure allows us to measure the slant of a much wider range of outlets, including over 400 daily newspapers representing over 70% of total daily circulation in theUnited States.” (pp. 36–39)“consumer demand responds strongly to the ﬁt between a newspaper’s slant and the ideology of potential readers, implying an economic incentive for newspapers to tailor their slant to theideological predispositions of consumers. ...By contrast, we ﬁnd much less evidence for a role of newspaper owners in determining slant.” (p. 64) Grabe & Bucy 2009 (broadcast TV news)“...visual coverage patterns across the four general election cycles [1992–2004] in terms of volume, visual weight, and packaging ...” (p. 211)“In our analysis, the overwhelming pattern of ﬁndings points to evidence of visual bias in favor of Republican candidates.” (p. 213) Groeling 2008 (broadcast & cableTV)“The broadcast database included programs airing January 1, 1997, through February 1, 2008, except for Fox News, for which transcriptswere unavailable prior to June 1, 1998.” (p. 637)“The results provide substantial evidence for bias in the news choices across [Fox News’s ﬂagship news program, Special Report , as well as on ABC’s, CBS’s, and NBC’s evening newscasts], although somewhat surprisingly, the results are stronger for some of the networks than for Fox.” (p. 631) Groeling & Baum 2009 (broadcast TV news)“we instead narrow our focus to test our argument against a particularly consequential subset of [member of Congress] appearances: those taking place in the month following so-called‘rally-round-the-ﬂag’ events (Mueller, 1973)—that is, major uses of military force by the United States (Oneal et al. 1996)—between 1980 and 2003.” (pp. 438–39)“We ﬁnd that the evening news presents a biased sample of elite rhetoric, heavily over-representing criticism of the president by his own party, while under-representing supportive rhetoric.” (p. 437) Groseclose & Milyo 2005 (newspaper,broadcast & cable TV, Internet news, radio)“For the congressional data, we coded all citations that occurred during the period January 1, 1993, to December 31, 2002. This covered the103rd through 107th Congresses. We used the period 1993 to 1999 to calculate the average adjusted ADA [Americans for Democratic Action] score for members of Congress.” (p. 1,199)“Our results show a strong liberal bias. All of the news outlets except Fox News’ Special Report and the Washington Times received a score to the left of the average member of Congress.” (p. 1,191) Hehman et al. 2012 (Internet news)“Images were collected ...of each target during times of their presidency (i.e., 1/20/2001–1/19/2009 for George W. Bush; 1/20/2009–5/15/2010 for Barack Obama). Five media outlets wereselected as sources of images based upon wide readership, clear classiﬁcation as conservative- or liberal-leaning, and an availability of images accompanying online articles. We selected both traditionalnews media outlets and well-known blogs [FOX.com, Townhall, CNN.com, MSNBC.com, and the Hufﬁngton Post].” (p. 48)“Media outlets sharing political orientations with a target portrayed them as more warm and competent than targets of another orientation.” (p. 46) (Continued ) www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 141 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Table 3 ( Continued ) Study (data source) Sample Main ﬁnding Ho & Quinn 2008 (newspaper)“We deﬁne our observation period as the last natural Rehnquist court, 1994–2004.” (p. 359)“The two most liberal newspapers (the New York Times and the Detroit Free Press ), for example, are estimated to be on either side of this natural court’s most liberal member—Justice Stevens. The two most conservative newspapers (the New York Post and Investor’s Business Daily ) are just to the left of Justices Scalia and Thomas—no paper appears to be quite as conservative as the most conservative justices.” (p. 363) Larcinese et al. 2011 (newspaper)“We then perform our analysis on a large number of U.S. newspapers over the period 1996–2005 for four key economic issues: unemployment, the budget deﬁcit, inﬂation, and thetrade deﬁcit.” (p. 1,179)“We ﬁnd evidence that newspapers with pro-Democratic endorsement pattern systematically give more coverage to high unemployment when the incumbent president is a Republican than when the president isDemocratic, compared to newspapers with pro-Republican endorsement pattern.” (p. 1,178) Lowry 2008 (broadcast TV news)“The time periods covered were the ﬁrst six years of both the Bill Clinton and George W. Bush administrations.” (p. 483)“Results generally supported the partisan (i.e., pro-Democrat) bias hypothesis, as well as a bad news bias.” (p. 483) Morris & Francia 2010 (cable TVnews)“In this study, the authors test for the presence of bias during Fox News and CNN’s coverage of the 2004 national partyconventions. ...We searched all Fox News and CNN transcripts during prime time viewing hours (8 PM–11 PM,4 8 hours of coverage total for both channels).” (pp. 834–37)“The content analysis demonstrates that Fox News’s coverage was more favorable to the Republican Party than it was to the Democratic Party,while CNN’s coverage was more impartial.” (p. 834) Niven 2003 (newspaper)“The focus here is on the last four members of Congress to switch parties before 1 January 2003.” (p. 316) [The earliest of these four switchers was Rep. Jimmy Hayes of LA, whoannounced his switch on December 1, 1995.]“The results provide little evidence of partisan media bias, and no support for allegations of a proliberal or pro-Democratic bias.” (p. 311) Schiffer 2006 (newspaper)“This study models variation in the relative amount and tone of coverage received by candidates in 95 content analyses of newspapers’ Senate election coverage from 1988–1992.” (p. 23)“While news-organizational factors are found to dominate the amount model, a modest amount of residual slant toward the Democratic candidates remains in the tone of coverage, controlling for structural bias.” (p. 23) Soroka 2012 (newspaper)“Automated content analytic methods are used to capture the distribution of tone in stories on unemployment from 1980 to 2008 in the New York Times , and this is compared to the distribution of upwards and downward changes in the unemployment rate.” (p. 514)“Results ...do not support the notion of an ongoing Democratic bias in theNYT ....[M]edia content on unemployment appears to be more negatively biased during Democratic administrations. The differencewhere inﬂation is concerned is less stark, though it does lean towards the possibility of a more negative tilt during Republican administrations. ... Results [on a replication sample from the Washington Post ] are strikingly similar.” (pp. 524–25) Waldman & Devitt 1998 (newspaper—photos)“All photos of Clinton or Dole appearing in the news sections of theNew York Times, Washington Post, Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, and USA Today between 1 September 1996 and 5 November 1996 (election day) were coded.” (p. 305)“The authors reject the conclusion of ‘liberal bias’ in the press coverage of presidential campaigns, arguing instead for the presence of a strategicbias beneﬁting the front-runner.” (p. 302) 142 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 on more innovative recent work (mainly published within the last decade), again constraining my focus to studies of partisan bias in the United States. I begin by discussing how scholars haveaddressed the unobserved population problem, then move on to strategies for dealing with sub- jectivity, and ﬁnally discuss some interesting projects that do not ﬁt neatly into either of these categories but might be of considerable interest to scholars examining media bias. Strategies for Addressing the Unobserved Population Problem In lieu of some way to observe potential stories that never appeared in the news, the most common approach to address the unobserved population problem is to make explicit or implicit assumptions about the composition of that unobserved population. The classic implicit or explicit assumptionin the American context was that fair coverage should be judged by equal coverage or treatment of the two parties. As discussed above, this assumption was more plausible when the analysis incorporated a variety of partisan settings and circumstances, rather than a single campaign. Find equivalent cases. Other scholars have approached this assumption by examining media behavior in cases “in which political leaders from the two parties have produced comparable resultsor engaged in comparable behavior,” leading to an expectation of even-handed coverage (Niven 2002, p. 74). For example, Niven (2003) conducted an elegant test for media bias by comparing the coverage of members of Congress who had switched parties. He argued that because themember, district, and political context had not changed after the party switch, differences in coverage must therefore have been caused by the change in partisanship, reﬂecting bias. Barrett & Barrington (2005) chose to examine only close races with uncertain outcomes, which they arguedwould be expected to receive equivalent coverage. Morris & Francia (2010) chose to analyze each party’s 2004 nominating convention coverage on two networks (CNN and Fox), which they argued were similar events and thus should have been covered similarly. In each of these studies,however, a reader could argue that the comparisons might still be driven by spurious differences other than party (the difference between moving into versus out of the majority party; differences in candidate quality; or differences in convention themes, speakers, and contexts). Control for “structural” factors. As I discussed above, there are many criteria related to coverage decisions that are not a function of partisanship. Such “structural” (Hofstetter 1976) concernsmight lead to coverage patterns that appear partisan but are actually the result of excluded variables. Conceptualizing the issue this way suggests that the solution is simply to rigorously account for the relevant structural factors, increasing conﬁdence that any partisan differences found incoverage are the result of biased decision making on the part of news organizations. Although many studies have attempted to achieve this control in one way or another, Schiffer (2006) is a particularly interesting example. He built his project on replication data provided by a previousstudy of Senate election coverage (Kahn & Kenney 2002) and added controls for nonpartisan, nonideological news judgment criteria, such as candidate quality (incumbency, money, standing in the polls, scandals, and the competitiveness of the race), national conditions (state of the economy, presidential approval, presence of a presidential campaign), market forces (operationalized as the state’s partisanship and ideology), and editorial endorsements by the newspapers. Schiffer ﬁndsthat controlling for these structural factors eliminated the statistical impact of partisanship on the total amount of coverage received by candidates, and reduced—but did not eliminate—the signiﬁcant Democratic advantage in tone. However, one obvious limitation to this approach is thedifﬁculty of controlling for all possible structural factors. www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 143 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Compare to other news organizations’ coverage. Even though researchers cannot view the pool of potential stories from which a news organization made its choices, they know other newsorganizations had access to that same pool. Thus, some researchers compare coverage across news organizations to better understand the bias of any single news organization’s coverage. Hofstetter (1976) attempted to use similarities in coverage across the national evening newscasts of ABC,CBS, and NBC to signify the impact of structural (nonideological) factors, with differences across outlets indicating partisan bias. As Schiffer (2006) observes, however, such an analysis “cannot distinguish whether a consistent slant ...results from uniformity in nonideological journalistic norms and constraints or from uniformity in bias” (p. 29). Other scholars have attempted to use varying media coverage to generate a more comprehensive population of stories. For example, Stovall (1988) conducted an extensive initial search across news organizations to generate a comprehensive list of presidential campaign events, then used that list to search for mentions of those events in other outlets. However, he focuses on aggregate patternsof coverage rather than using the two-stage search to test for selection bias on the part of the news organizations. Barrett & Peake (2007) also use a known set of presidential events—in this case, out-of-town travel by President George W. Bush in 2001—to examine patterns in the coverage of different news organizations. Their design uses the Washington Post ’s coverage of these trips to provide a baseline for examining the volume and tone of local newspaper coverage of the trips. Covert & Wasburn (2007) also use some media organizations as exemplars to help interpret the choices of others. In this case, they use overtly partisan news magazines ( The Progressive and the National Review ) to provide examples of what liberal and conservative coverage would look like. They then test for similarity in the coverage of Time and Newsweek over 25 years. Finally, Baum & Groeling (2008) examine the decisions of several news organizations and websites by comparing their coverage to the content of the political newsfeeds of two wire services. In the lead-up to the 2006 midterm elections, they collected and content-analyzed all of the stories appearing on the Associated Press’s and Reuters’s political newsfeeds. They then tracked whichof the stories were picked up by DailyKos.com, FreeRepublic.com, or FoxNews.com or were covered on each wire service’s “top news” feed. The study ﬁnds considerable evidence of partisan selection bias across the media organizations, even the supposedly nonpartisan wire services. Inaddition, although the wire service stories were only a rough approximation of the true unobserved population of potential stories available to each of the studied media organizations, examining it demonstrates why relying on an assumed 50–50 baseline of coverage can lead to false inferences.In this case, the coding of the wire services’ political stories showed a massive disparity in content across the parties. Put simply, 2006 was objectively a terrible election cycle for Republicans, dominated by the perceived failure of the Bush administration’s policies in Iraq and especiallyby extensive coverage of domestic scandals enveloping the Republican Party (including the Mark Foley sexting scandal). When there are ﬁve damaging potential stories about Republicans for every damaging potential story about Democrats, presenting coverage with equal numbers of negativestories about each party would, in fact, be a case of severe selection bias against Democrats. 7 Observe (or create?) the elusive unobserved population. Of course, each of the studies dis- cussed so far has only been able to generate an estimate of the underlying population of stories 7Groeling & Baum (2009) use a similar technique to search for selection bias, but instead code all of the statements of partisans appearing on Sunday morning interview shows and then track which statements from those shows were cited in the network’sregular evening news shows. 144 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 from which newsmakers chose their stories. In this section, we discuss a slightly different approach to solving this problem: narrowing the study to a subset of news content in which the researcheris able to view all potential stories, as well as the choices made by journalists regarding which of the stories to accept or reject. Aday (2010) and Baum & Groeling (2010) both test for partisan selection bias in news coverage of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Speciﬁcally, they assemble measures of the “situation on the ground” in the conﬂicts (particularly with regard to casualties and major war events) and attempt to test whether news coverage of the situation on the ground is more likely to show negative or positive developments (and whether that tendency varies across parties). Larcinese et al. (2011) conduct a similar study but focus on coverage of economic statistics in the news. Because these ofﬁcial statistics are released on a deﬁnitive timetable and are relatively easy to track in news coverage, the authors achieve very reliable measures of the characteristics of potential stories about these economic statistics, and then observe precisely which stories areproduced (and by which news organizations). Larcinese et al. then use political endorsements by these same news organizations to predict whether coverage in a given outlet is consistent with its apparent partisan leanings. They ﬁnd “strong evidence that newspapers endorsing Democraticcandidates give less coverage to high unemployment (and more coverage to low unemployment) under Clinton than under George W. Bush, as compared to Republican-leaning newspapers” (p. 1,188). Similarly, Lowry (2008, p. 483) tries to “avoid the subjectivity problems of most newsbias content analyses by using objective criteria to select network news stories to be analyzed (reports of changes of +/−2% in Dow Jones scores) and computerized coding, ﬁnding support for the partisan (i.e., pro-Democrat) bias hypothesis, as well as a bad news bias.” Soroka (2012)examines gatekeeping by systematically tracking government data on the economy (particularly unemployment) and the appearance and (using an automated coding tool) the valence of unem- ployment stories over nearly 30 years of New York Times (replicating the results for the Washington Post). In Groeling (2008), I used a similar research design, based on a method Groeling & Kernell (1998) employed to examine negativity: narrowing the focus to news coverage of presidential approval polls. Such polls are a wonderful way to test for media bias because they are publicly archived, thus allowing their full population to be observed. Moreover, using each news orga-nization’s archived in-house survey results as the population to be tracked also allowed me to address issues of subjectivity by providing a clear, consistent, and objective standard for whether an individual survey is “good news.” The design allowed for relatively straightforward testing ofnews organizations’ partisan biases by examining how they reported favorable and unfavorable poll results across presidential administrations. Perhaps the ultimate way to observe the unobserved population is to actually create it. In a very clever research design, Butler & Schoﬁeld (2010) test for media bias by submitting letters to the editor to 100 major US newspapers to test whether the party of the candidate supported in the letter would affect whether the newspaper decided to print the letter or not. They foundthat, contrary to expectations, there was more interest in publishing pro-McCain letters than in publishing pro-Obama letters, and newspapers preferred to print letters supporting candidates they had notendorsed. All these studies are critically dependent on a key assumption: that decisions made about the observed population of stories tell us something about how those same organizations treat otherstories outside that population. For example, it is possible that news organizations might follow different procedures for deciding whether to air the results of a poll they paid for with their own money, versus deciding whether to air any footage from an arbitrary member of Congress’ pressconference. www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 145 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Strategies for Dealing with Subjectivity In this section, I discuss studies that attempt to avoid the subjectivity problems associated with traditional content analyses. Such studies typically avoid making a priori determinations of what constitutes news favoring a particular party, instead choosing to model the news organization’sbehavior against some partisan exemplar. Gentzkow & Shapiro (2010) approach the topic of media bias in exactly this way. Rather than trying to systematically track tone, framing, or other similar information, they assemble a corpus “of all phrases used by members of Congress in the 2005 Congressional Record, and identify those that are used much more frequently by one party than by another” (p. 36). They then searchedthe news coverage of >400 newspapers covering that same time period to determine “whether the newspaper’s language is more similar to that of a congressional Republican or a congressional Democrat” (p. 42) by matching the distribution of key two- and three-word phrases used dispro-portionately by each party’s members. The study is particularly elegant in its manner of avoiding thorny issues of subjective interpretation: instead of calling on researchers to generate an arbitrary judgment of what content favors each party, they let the politicians themselves determine whatDemocrats or Republicans “sound like,” and then judge the partisanship of the news organiza- tion by how much they sound like each exemplar. The technique has the additional advantage of massive scalability: the authors report that on average, each of their 433 newspapers used theirsample phrases >13,000 times in a given year, which would have been challenging to code through conventional means (p. 45). Another good example of this increasingly common approach is by Ho & Quinn (2008), who infer the ideology of news organizations by comparing their editorial stances on major nonunani- mous Supreme Court cases. They conceive of such editorials as “votes on the same issue facing the governmental decisionmakers in question. Combining this insight with well-developed statistical methods for ideal point estimation allows [the authors] to jointly analyze governmental actors and newspaper editorial boards, placing newspapers on a long-validated, substantively meaningful,and transparent scale of political preferences” (p. 355). Their study avoids issues of subjectivity; Ho & Quinn note that “since we only code whether a newspaper clearly supported either the majority or minority position, we never have to worry directly about making value judgmentsabout what constitutes a conservative or liberal position across multiple areas of law. Such out- comes are empirically estimated” (p. 362). Their method also allows them to relate the ideology of newspapers to equivalent Supreme Court justices: “The two most liberal newspapers (the New York Times and the Detroit Free Press ), for example, are estimated to be on either side of this nat- ural court’s most liberal member—Justice Stevens. The two most conservative newspapers (the New York Post and Investor’s Business Daily ) are just to the left of Justices Scalia and Thomas—no paper appears to be quite as conservative as the most conservative justices” (p. 363). Ho & Quinn also cross-validate their results by comparing them with the ﬁndings of Groseclose & Milyo (2005). It seems safe to say that no other recent scholarly article on media bias has garnered as much attention inside and outside academia as Groseclose & Milyo’s (2005). Their article and the subse- quent book by Groseclose (2011) are important attempts to study media bias on an ambitious scale.The research produces replicable estimates (with minimal subjectivity) of the relative partisanship of large numbers of news organizations. The authors’ many research assistants tracked the number of times each media outlet referred to think tanks and policy groups, then repeated the task for the speeches by members of Congress. They then searched for citation patterns of the media outlets and lawmakers, and assigned an equivalent ideology score to each media organization based on itssimilarity to the citation patterns of those lawmakers. 146 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Even before it was published, the study received a great deal of attention (and criticism). Nyhan (2005) argued that left- or center-left think tanks tend to “have more credentialed experts withpeer-reviewed publications” than conservatives, which “may result in a greater number of citations by the press, which seeks out expert perspectives on the news, but not more citations by members of Congress, who generally seek out views that reinforce their own.” Groseclose & Milyo respondedthat if think tank quality was not correlated with ideology, it would not harm their estimates, demonstrating the point by adding controls for think tank quality and ﬁnding similar results. Gasper (2011) uses a replication dataset provided by Groseclose & Milyo to test the robustness of their ﬁndings. His results show that repeating the analysis separately for smaller time periods causes the ideological estimates for the news organizations to drift (but not change their relativeordering). The results also show sensitivity to the removal of observations from the most-cited group (the National Taxpayers Union), which shifted the estimated ideology of media an average of nine points. Others criticize the characterization of the Groseclose & Milyo (2005) study as media bias research because all of its estimates of media bias are based on indirect data. Gelman (2011) com- ments “that ‘bias’ isn’t quite the right word to discuss what Groseclose and Milyo measure ....[ M ] y big problem with the Groseclose and Milyo estimates of media bias is that they are indirect .... If you do more of X and less of Y, you’re biasing the news in one direction or another—you’re directly sending out a message that can inﬂuence people. In contrast, the Groseclose and Milyomeasure—citations of research and advocacy groups—is almost entirely indirect.” Finally, some have criticized the study based on its less intuitive results or estimates; see, for example, Waldman’s (2011) discussion of the study’s surprising estimates of the ideology of the Wall Street Journal and of several think tanks. Visual Bias Despite the importance of local, network, and cable television news, a surprisingly large proportionof media bias studies continue to focus on newspapers as their main or exclusive medium of study(about two-thirds of the studies consulted for this review did so). Undoubtedly, this stems in part from the relatively broad availability of full-text content from newspapers, in contrast to the erratic availability of transcripts for other media. However, even when television transcripts are available,they present researchers with an incomplete picture of reality by excluding the visual dimension of a fundamentally visual medium. Several projects have attempted to tackle the relatively difﬁcult goal of measuring bias in visuals used in the news. For example, Waldman & Devitt (1998) analyzed photographs of presidential nominees in the 1996 presidential race used in ﬁve major newspapers, ﬁnding that the favorability of the images seems to track the candidates’ standing in the polls more than the editorial slant ofindividual newspapers. But Barrett & Barrington (2005), discussed above, tracked the presentation of candidate visuals in closely matched races and report a high degree of correspondence between a paper’s current and historic editorial slant and the relative favorability of images used for each candidate. Grabe & Bucy (2009) take on the daunting task of systematically examining visual bias in television news. Their detailed content analysis scheme codes the visual framing of coverage, visual weight, and various metrics of beneﬁcial packaging (getting the “last say,” low angles, close-ups, zoom-ins, and eyewitness camera perspectives) or detrimental packaging (“lip ﬂap”clips, in which the candidate is shown speaking but is not heard; high angles; extreme close- ups; long shots; zoom-outs). Similarly, Banning & Coleman (2009) performed a content analysis of the nonverbal messages in 1,159 shots drawn from television coverage of the 2000 election. www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 147 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 They coded the facial expressions, appearance, and nonverbal behavior of the candidates, and the structural features of television edited into news stories by journalists (camera angle, distance, andmovement). Finally, Hehman et al. (2012) examined >400 presidential images from ﬁve online media sites and coded them for warmth and competence, ﬁnding more favorable portrayals on sites sharing the president’s ideology. Other Measures of Newsmaker Decision Making Another promising avenue for examining media bias lies in the examination of newsmaker de-cisions beyond the content of news coverage itself. For example, press conferences are a rareopportunity for researchers to examine a large population of potential stories. In a sense, every question asked in a press conference represents the germ of a potential story, at least in the mind of the reporter who asked it. Researchers could match those questions and answers up with thesubset that were actually included in subsequent news reports. Along those same lines, Clayman et al. (2010) systematically analyze the behavior of reporters in such settings. Speciﬁcally, they painstakingly code the aggressiveness of reporters’ questions along a variety of dimensions, in-cluding “adversarialness” (the extent to which questions pursue an agenda in opposition to the president or his administration), accountability (the extent to which questions explicitly ask the president to justify his policies or actions), assertiveness (the extent to which questions invite aparticular answer and are in that sense opinionated rather than neutral), initiative (the extent to which questions are enterprising rather than passive in their aims), and directness (the extent to which questions are blunt rather than cautious in raising issues). Online Behavior The behaviors of media organizations and citizens online represent a promising new arena inwhich to examine issues of media bias. Scholars are already developing tools to recognize sim-ilar ideological viewpoints in a corpus of online text (see, e.g., Efron 2006). Cross-linkages and redistribution of political information across social networks will allow scholars to more directly observe the news values of both traditional journalists and amateurs (see, e.g., Conover et al. 2011on the retweeting behavior of reporters). In addition, online tools should allow researchers the potential to gain easier access to citizens beyond the traditional pool of introductory course students at most universities. In particular,tools such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk have the potential to give scholars rapid and affordable access to a large, diverse pool of research participants capable of providing near-instantaneous measures of the meaning and impact of news content. CONCLUSION As noted media scholar Barack Obama observed earlier in this article, “The golden age of an objective press wasa pretty narrow span of time in our history” (emphasis added). It now seems clear that we are entering a new, more partisan era in American journalism. Ironically, it appears that the future will more closely resemble the nineteenth century’s press than the twentieth century’s, with some news organizations choosing to distinguish themselves in a crowded marketplace bydelivering a reliably ideological product. As CBS head Les Moonves said at a fundraiser for President Obama, “Ultimately journalism has changed ...partisanship is very much a part of journalism now” (Abcarian & Hennessey 2012). With the return of this overt partisanship in news(particularly cable and Internet news sources), some commentators have grown concerned that 148 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 news consumers might choose to “cocoon” themselves into congenial news sources (see Prior 2013 in this volume). Although that particular concern falls outside the bounds of this review, areturn to an era when news organizations explicitly identiﬁed themselves as favoring one party over another promises to be both a blessing and a curse for scholars of media bias, simultaneously enriching the data and decreasing the perceived need for such research. DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The author is not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review. LITERATURE CITED Abcarian R, Hennessey K. 2012. President Obama gets enthusiastic welcome at L.A. gay event. Los An- geles Times ,J u n e6 . http://articles.latimes.com/2012/jun/06/nation/la-na-obama-gay-fundraiser- 20120607 Aday S. 2010. Chasing the bad news: an analysis of 2005 Iraq and Afghanistan war coverage on NBC and Fox News Channel. J. Commun. 60:144–64 Alan J, Lane JM. 2003. Anchoring America: The Changing Face of Network News . Chicago: Bonus Books Banning S, Coleman R. 2009. Louder than words: a content analysis of presidential candidates’ televised nonverbal communication. Visual Commun. Q. 16:4–17 Barrett AW, Barrington LW. 2005. Bias in newspaper photograph selection. Polit. Res. Q. 58:609–18 Barrett AW, Peake JS. 2007. When the president comes to town. A m .P o l i t .R e s . 35:3–31 Baum MA, Groeling T. 2008. New media and the polarization of American political discourse. Polit. Commun. 25:345–65 Baum MA, Gussin P. 2007. In the eye of the beholder: how information shortcuts shape individual perceptions of bias in the media. Q. J. Polit. Sci. 3:1–31 Baum M, Groeling T. 2009. Shot by the messenger: partisan cues and public opinion regarding national security and war. Polit. Behav. 31:157–86 Baum M, Groeling TJ. 2010. War Stories: The Causes and Consequences of Public Views of War .P r i n c e t o n ,N J : Princeton Univ. Press Boehlert E. 2011. Fox News insider: “stuff is just made up.” Blog post. http://mediamatters.org/blog/2011/ 02/10/fox-news-insider-stuff-is-just-made-up/176184 Breed W. 1952. The newspaperman, news, and society . PhD thesis, Columbia Univ. Butler DM, Schoﬁeld E. 2010. Were newspaper more interested in pro-Obama letters to the editor in 2008? Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. A m .P o l i t .R e s . 38:356–71 Clayman SE, Elliot MN, Heritage J, Beckett MK. 2010. A watershed in White House journalism: explaining the post-1968 rise of aggressive presidential news. Polit. Commun. 27(3):229–47 Cohen P. 2010. Professor is a label that leans to the left. NY Times , Jan. 17, p. C1. http://www. nytimes.com/2010/01/18/arts/18liberal.html Colbert S. 2006. 2006 White House Correspondents’ Dinner [television broadcast]. Washington, DC: Cable-Satellite Public Aff. Netw. Retrieved from http://politicalhumor.about.com/od/ stephencolbert/a/colbertbush.htm Conover MD, Goncalves B, Ratkiewicz J, Flammini A, Menczer F. 2011. Predicting the political alignment of Twitter users . Presented at IEEE Int. Conf. Social Comput., 3rd (SocialCom2011), Boston, MA, Oct. 9–11 Covert TJA, Wasburn PC. 2007. Measuring media bias: a content analysis of Time and Newsweek coverage of domestic social issues, 1975–2000. Soc. Sci. Q. 88:690–706 D’Alessio D, Allen M. 2000. Media bias in presidential elections: a meta-analysis. J. Commun. 50:133–56 Dalton RJ, Beck PA, Huckfeldt R. 1998. Partisan cues and the media: information ﬂows in the 1992 presidential election. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 92:111–26 www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 149 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Druckman JN, Parkin M. 2005. The impact of media bias: how editorial slant affects voters. J. Polit. 67:1030–49 Efron E. 1971. The News Twisters . Los Angeles: Nash Efron M. 2006. Using cocitation information to estimate political orientation in web documents. Knowledge Inf. Syst. 9(4):492–511 Entman RM. 2007. Framing bias: media in the distribution of power. J. Commun. 57:163–73 Entman RM. 2010. Media framing biases and political power: explaining slant in news of Campaign 2008. Journalism 11:389–408 Fineman H. 2005. The “media party” is over. MSNBC. http://msnbc.msn.com/id/6813945/#. T_KAzvWTWkJ Franken A. 2003. Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right . New York: Penguin Gasper JT. 2011. Shifting ideologies? Re-examining media bias. Q. J. Polit. Sci. 6:85–102 Gelman A. 2011. Thoughts on Groseclose book on media bias . Blog post. http://themonkeycage.org/blog/ 2011/07/29/thoughts-on-groseclose-book-on-media-bias/ Gentzkow M, Shapiro JM. 2006. Media bias and reputation. J. Polit. Econ. 114:280–316 Gentzkow M, Shapiro JM. 2010. What drives media slant? Evidence from U.S. daily newspapers. Econometrica 78:35–71 Goldberg B. 2001. Bias: A CBS Insider Exposes How the Media Distort the News . Washington, DC: Regnery Grabe ME, Bucy EP. 2009. Image Bite Politics: News and the Visual Framing of Elections. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press Groeling T. 2008. Who’s the fairest of them all? An empirical test for partisan bias on ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox News. Presidential Stud. Q. 38:631–57 Groeling T, Baum MA. 2009. Journalists’ incentives and media coverage of elite foreign policy evaluations. Conﬂ. Manag. Peace Sci. 26:437–70 Groeling T, Kernell S. 1998. Is network news coverage of the president biased? J. Polit. 60:1063–87 Groseclose T. 2011. Left Turn: How Liberal Media Bias Distorts the American Mind. New York: St. Martin’s Press Groseclose T, Milyo J. 2005. A measure of media bias. Q. J. Econ. 120:1191–237 Hamilton JT. 2006. All the News That’s Fit to Sell: How the Market Transforms Information into News . Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press Hastorf AH, Cantril H. 1954. They saw a game: a case study. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol. 49:129–34 Hehman E, Graber EC, Hoffman LH, Gaertner SL. 2012. Warmth and competence: a content analysis of photographs depicting American presidents. Psychol. Popular Media Cult. 1:46–52 Ho DE, Quinn KM. 2008. Measuring explicit political positions of media. Q. J. Polit. Sci. 3:353–77 Hofstetter CR. 1976. Bias in the News: Network Television Coverage of the 1972 Election Campaign . Columbus: Ohio State Univ. Press Kahn KF, Kenney PJ. 2002. The slant of the news: how editorial endorsements inﬂuence campaign coverage and citizens’ views of candidates. A m .P o l i t .S c i .R e v . 96:381–94 Kuklinski JH, Sigelman L. 1992. When objectivity is not objective: network television news coverage of U.S. senators and the “paradox of objectivity.” J. Polit. 54:810–33 Ladd JM. 2012. Why Americans Hate the Media and How it Matters . Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press Larcinese V, Puglisi R, Snyder JM Jr. 2011. Partisan bias in economic news: evidence on the agenda-setting behavior of U.S. newspapers. J. Public Econ. 95:1178–89 Lichter SR, Rothman S, Lichter LS. 1986. The Media Elite . Bethesda, MD: Adler & Adler Lowry DT. 2008. Network TV news framing of good vs. bad economic news under Democrat and Republican presidents: a lexical analysis of political bias. Journalism Mass Commun. Q. 85:483–98 Morris JS, Francia PL. 2010. Cable news, public opinion, and the 2004 party conventions. Polit. Res. Q. 63:834–49 Murdoch R. 2012. Tweet, July 2. https://twitter.com/rupertmurdoch/status/219790585307992067 Murray S. 2012. Romney speciﬁes deductions he’d cut. Wall Street J . Apr. 15, A4. http://online.wsj.com/ article/SB10001424052702304432704577346611860756628.html Niven D. 2002. Tilt? The Search for Media Bias . Westport, CT: Praeger 150 Groeling Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16CH07-Groeling ARI 9 April 2013 15:36 Niven D. 2003. Objective evidence on media bias: newspaper coverage of congressional party switchers. Journalism Mass Commun. Q. 80:311–26 Nyhan B. 2005. The problems with the Groseclose/Milyo study of media bias . Blog post. http://www. brendan-nyhan.com/blog/2005/12/the_problems_wi.html Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. 2004. How journalists see journalists in 2004 .http://www. people-press.org/ﬁles/legacy-pdf/214.pdf Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. 2005. America’s place in the world 2005: an investigation of the attitudes of American opinion leaders and the American public about international affairs .http://www. people-press.org/ﬁles/legacy-pdf/263.pdf Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. 2011. July 2011 political and me- dia survey .http://www.people-press.org/ﬁles/legacy-questionnaires/Media%20topline%20for% 20release.pdf Prior M. 2013. Media and political polarization. Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 16:101–27 Reynolds GH. 2012. Spin of the times: bias cloaked as front-page news. Opinion, New York Post ,M a y5 , http://www.nypost.com/p/news/opinion/spin_of_the_times_bias_cloaked_as_6JZNaz5PXr9H2Z6DkWAhdL Schiffer AJ. 2006. Assessing partisan bias in political news: the case(s) of local senate election coverage. Polit. Commun. 23:23–39 Shaw D. 1985. The Times poll: public and press—two viewpoints. Los Angeles Times. http://articles. latimes.com/1985-08-11/news/mn-3210_1_times-poll Smith GR. 2010. Politicians and the news media: how elite attacks inﬂuence perceptions of media bias. Int. J. Press/Polit. 15:319–43 Soroka SN. 2012. The gatekeeping function: distributions of information in media and the real world. J. Polit. 74:514–28 Stevenson RL, Eisinger RA, Feinberg BM, Kotok AB. 1973. Untwisting the news twisters: a replication of Efron’s study. Journalism Mass Commun. Q. 50:211–19 Stovall JG. 1988. Coverage of 1984 presidential campaign. J. Mass Commun. Q. 65:443–49 Turner J. 2007. The messenger overwhelming the message: ideological cues and perceptions of bias in tele- vision news. Polit. Behav. 29:441–64 Vallone RP, Ross L, Lepper MR. 1985. The hostile media phenomenon: biased perception and perceptions of media bias in coverage of the Beirut massacre. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 49(3):577–85 VandeHei J, Allen M. 2012. To GOP, blatant bias in vetting. Politico May 31 http://www.politico.com/ news/stories/0512/76898.html Waldman P, Devitt J. 1998. Newspaper photographs and the 1996 presidential election: the question of bias. Journalism Mass Commun. Q. 75:302–11 Waldman P. 2011. Tomorrow’s bogus liberal bias claim today . Blog post. Am. Prospect. http:// prospect.org/article/tomorrows-bogus-liberal-bias-claim-today Watts MD, Domke D, Shah DV, Fan DP. 1999. Elite cues and media bias in presidential campaigns. Commun. Res. 26:144–75 Weaver DH, Wilhoit GC. 1991. The American Journalist: A Portrait of U.S. News People and Their Work. Bloomington, IN: Indiana Univ. Press Weaver DH, Wilhoit GC. 1996. The American Journalist in the 1990s: U.S. News People at the End of an Era. Florence, KY: Psychol. Press Weaver DH, Wilhoit GC. 2007. The American Journalist in the 21st Century: U.S. News People at the Dawn of a New Millennium. Florence, KY: Psychol. Press Wenner JS. 2010. Obama in command: the Rolling Stone interview. Rolling Stone Oct. 14. http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/obama-in-command-br-the-rolling-stone-interview-20100928?print =true Zeldes GA, Fico F, Carpenter S, Diddi A. 2008. Partisan balance and bias in network coverage of the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections. J. Broadcasting Electronic Media 52:563–80 www.annualreviews.org •Media Bias by the Numbers 151 Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16-frontmatter ARI 8 April 2013 21:25 Annual Review of Political Science Volume 16, 2013 Contents The Political Theory License Michael Walzer pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 1 Reconsidering Judicial Preferences Lee Epstein and Jack Knight ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 11 Social Networks and Political Participation David E. Campbell ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 33 Why Social Relations Matter for Politics and Successful Societies Peter A. Hall and Mich` ele Lamont pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 49 Distributive Politics Around the World Miriam Golden and Brian Min ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 73 Media and Political Polarization Markus Prior ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 101 Media Bias by the Numbers: Challenges and Opportunities in the Empirical Study of Partisan News Tim Groeling ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 129 The Political Economy of the Euro Paul De Grauwe pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 153 Empowerment of the European Parliament Simon Hix and Bjørn Høyland ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 171 The Use and Misuse of the “Minorities at Risk” Project Simon Hug pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 191 Looking Back to See Ahead: Unanticipated Changes in Immigration from 1986 to the Present and Their Implications for American Politics Today Michael Jones-Correa and Els de Graauw pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 209 The Changing Landscape of US Unions in Historical and Theoretical Perspective Michael Goldﬁeld and Amy Bromsen pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 231 v Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only.  PL16-frontmatter ARI 8 April 2013 21:25 The Analytical Foundations of Collective Action Theory: A Survey of Some Recent Developments Luis Fernando Medina ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 259 Retrospective Voting Reconsidered Andrew Healy and Neil Malhotra ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 285 Cooperative Survey Research Stephen Ansolabehere and Douglas Rivers ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 307 Regime Change Cascades: What We Have Learned from the 1848 Revolutions to the 2011 Arab Uprisings Henry E. Hale pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 331 Terrorism and Democracy Erica Chenoweth pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 355 Humanitarian Governance Michael N. Barnett ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 379 Green Clubs: Collective Action and Voluntary Environmental Programs Matthew Potoski and Aseem Prakash ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 399 Climate Change Politics Thomas Bernauer pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 421 The Politics of Energy Llewelyn Hughes and Phillip Y. Lipscy pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 449 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 12–16 ppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 471 Cumulative Index of Article Titles, Volumes 12–16 ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp 473 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Political Science articles may be found at http://polisci.annualreviews.org/ vi Contents Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013.16:129-151. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org  Access provided by St Petersburg State University on 09/30/19. For personal use only. 