 A Question of Balance — 1Running head: A QUESTION OF BALANCE A Question of Balance:Are Google News search results politically biased?By Eric UlkenUSC Annenberg School for CommunicationMay 5, 2005 A Question of Balance — 2 AbstractThis study examines search results from the popular online news portal Google News inan effort to determine whether they are politically biased.  By analyzing the content ofthird-party articles returned in a search on a political candidate (“George W. Bush,” forexample), it is possible to assess the level of bias in the search results.  Articles returnedin searches on the two leading presidential candidates in the weeks before the 2004election were collected, and a random sample of the highest-ranking results was analyzedfor favorability to each candidate.  Results from the same searches on Yahoo News wereused as a benchmark for comparison.  The data show that articles returned in GoogleNews searches are significantly more likely to have a political bias than those returned insearches on Yahoo News, but there is no evidence of an overall conservative bias insearch results on Google News, as has been suggested. A Question of Balance — 3 A Question of Balance: Are Google News search results politically biased?As online news has grown in popularity, a number of sites have sprung up tocatalog the wealth of news content available on the Internet. These so-called news portalsinclude Google News, Yahoo News, Topix.net and MSNBC’s Newsbot.  Through anautomated process known as “spidering” or “crawling,” these aggregators index thecontent of selected news sources and allow users to browse and search recent newsstories, usually linking to the source of the article for the full text.Google News, launched in 2001 but still in the “beta-testing” phase, has becomeone of the Internet’s most popular news portals, drawing about 5.9 million visitors amonth (Gaither, 2005). It indexes the top stories on some 4,500 English-language newssites, updating its index roughly every 15 minutes (Google, 2004).  Google’s innovativemethod of identifying top stories based on how frequently they appear on sites in itsindex – and doing so entirely without human intervention – has made the site a target ofcriticism since its inception.  The efficiency with which Google News is able toautomatically determine relative importance of stories and present a “front page” with topstories in different subject areas has been seen by some as the first ominous sign thatcomputers will eventually make human editors obsolete. At the same time, users haveridiculed flaws in Google News’s algorithms that cause it to occasionally attach a photo A Question of Balance — 4to an unrelated article or elevate a relatively minor story to a prominent spot on its frontpage.Google News front page Yahoo News front page Google does not share the list of sources it crawls, but searches often revealresults from relatively obscure online-only news sites – including some that are bestdescribed as weblogs – leading to questions about Google News’s criteria for inclusionand the notion that there might be some political imbalance in the sites it crawls.  Googlehas taken a lot of criticism recently for the quality of news content in its index.  Earlierthis year, it removed from its index several sites, including the white supremacist journalNational Vanguard, after users complained that hate speech was turning up in searches.Practices at Google News have come under additional scrutiny since March, whenAgence France-Presse filed a lawsuit alleging that Google infringed its copyright bydisplaying AFP material on Google News pages.  The Associated Press has alsoexpressed “concern” about Google’s use of its material without payment (Gaither, 2005).Janice Castro, director of graduate programs at Northwestern University’s MedillSchool of Journalism and one of the founders of the Online News Association, toldCNET News.com the problem with Google News is that it gives users no way of A Question of Balance — 5evaluating the quality of news sources (Olsen, 2005).  “The best is mixed up with thingsthat are far from the best,” Castro said.Web journalism pioneer J.D. Lasica was among the first to suggest a conservativebias in Google News (2004).  “What’s going on?” he wrote in an article for OnlineJournalism Review as the 2004 presidential race was heating up.  “Have Google’s searchresults been hijacked by Fox News?”  Lasica cited several stories from “second-tier”online-only news and commentary sites in a search on the words “John Kerry.”  Theheadlines returned included the following: “John Kerry Said ‘Bring It On,’ Now Whines To Bush To Stop The Ads” “The Imploding John Kerry” “Swift Boat Veterans for Truth Expose John Kerry’s Lies” “John Kerry is Definitely ‘Unfit for Command’”Political bias in news coverage has been the topic of numerous academic studies,most of which have themselves been subjected to charges of bias.  Bias is practicallyimpossible to quantify absolutely, but it can be measured in relative terms.  One of themost widely cited and controversial recent studies attempts to do just that.  Grosecloseand Milyo (2003) assess bias among major news outlets – including The New York Times,USA Today and Fox News’ “Special Report” – by looking at how often they cite certainpolitically active “think tanks” and comparing this with how frequently members ofCongress cite the same sources in floor speeches.  The authors’ assumption is thatconservatively biased news organizations, say, will cite a certain think tank with the samefrequency as a conservative member of Congress.  The study’s conclusion is that themainstream media have an overwhelming liberal bias and the most unbiased news source A Question of Balance — 6is Fox News’ “Special Report.”  This finding was met with as much outrage as praisewhen the study first made the rounds of politically oriented weblogs (Dallas, 2004;Tabarrok, 2004) – proof that bias is always relative to the observer.This study attempts to scientifically test Lasica’s casual observation of bias inarticles linked from Google News.  Unlike the Groseclose/Milyo study, it does not havethe benefit of an independent benchmark for comparison.  Instead, it compares GoogleNews with a more established competitor, Yahoo News, in an attempt to determinerelative bias.  The study looks at balance within stories as an indicator of bias.  Abalanced article will presumably have roughly as many favorable references to the searchterm (i.e., the candidate) as it has unfavorable ones.  Given what Lasica and others havereported about Google News search results, the goal of this study is to prove or disprovequantitatively the assertion that Google News displays a conservative bias.The research question and hypothesis are as follows:RQ1: Are Google News search results politically biased?H1: Results of Google News searches on the two major-party presidentialcandidates will reveal a conservative bias.The research hypothesis is tested by means of a quantitative text analysis ofarticles returned in Google News and Yahoo News search results.MethodThis study analyzes articles returned in searches on the full names of the twomajor-party presidential candidates (“George W. Bush” and “John Kerry”) in the weeks A Question of Balance — 7leading up to the 2004 election in order to determine a bias score for each article and,ultimately, to quantify the overall bias of the search results.Data acquisitionSince the news search engines update their indexes frequently over the course of aday, the results for a particular search term can change from one minute to the next.  Adata acquisition scheme was devised that respects the dynamic nature of the searchresults.  A computer program was written to retrieve the first 10 articles returned byGoogle News and Yahoo News for each search term (“George W. Bush” and “JohnKerry”) at four-hour intervals and save them.Google News search results Yahoo News search results The program was run for the period of Oct. 17-30, 2004, the two weeks precedingthe Nov. 2 presidential election, resulting in a total of 80 “snapshots.”  Each snapshotcontained four sets of search results: “George W. Bush” on Google News, “George W.Bush” on Yahoo News, “John Kerry” on Google News and “John Kerry” on YahooNews.  The program also downloaded the full text of the first 10 articles returned in eachresult list. A Question of Balance — 8Sampling schemeTaking the top 10 articles in each list would yield 3,200 texts.  A moremanageable sample of 100 was selected for analysis.  In order to generate arepresentative sample, a two-stage sampling process was devised that divided the datacollection period into five sequential periods of equal length and then randomly selectedone snapshot from each period.  The stratified selection provided for a sample that wasspread fairly evenly over the two weeks, so that a single news event would be unlikely todominate the sample.  The random selection stage ensured that the final five snapshotsrepresented a variety of dayparts and days of the week.The following snapshots were selected: Monday, Oct. 18, 2004, midnight Thursday, Oct. 21, 2004, 8 a.m. Monday, Oct. 25, 2004, midnight Thursday, Oct. 28, 2004, 4 p.m. Saturday, Oct. 30, 2004, 8 a.m.For each snapshot, the first five articles from each of the four result lists wereselected for analysis, ensuring an equal number of Bush and Kerry results and an equalnumber of Google News and Yahoo News results.  In a couple of cases, the complete textof an article was behind a paid subscription wall.  Where possible, a shortened freeversion was used; otherwise the article was skipped and the next highest-ranked articlewas used instead. A Question of Balance — 9Units of observationThe articles were subdivided by sentence – with a sentence representing a singleunit of observation.  The decision was made to use sentences, rather than propositions, asthe units of observation for two reasons: The texts can be parsed into sentences with minimal work, an importantconsideration given the volume of the data. Propositions – that is, groups of words expressing a distinct idea, whether as aphrase, a sentence or multiple sentences – must be manually identified andparsed by coders.  This introduces the problem of unitizing reliability.Because a number of the texts were extremely long, only the first 25 sentences ofeach article were coded.  It was assumed that an article’s overall bias would be apparentwithin the first 25 sentences.  The results section offers data that support this assumption.Overall, 1,587 sentences were coded.Coding schemeEach sentence could be coded in one of five ways:1. Unfavorable to Kerry2. Favorable to Kerry3. Neutral4. Unfavorable to Bush5. Favorable to BushA coding manual was created to guide coders in the process of evaluating units.(See Appendix A for the full coding manual.)  Because the coding scheme involves A Question of Balance — 10assessing latent meanings of sentences – and the terms “favorable” and “unfavorable” areimprecise – the most important purpose of the coding manual is to define these terms andspecify how to apply them.  The basic coding rules used are as follows: A unit (sentence) can only be coded as favorable or unfavorable if it containsan unambiguous message that, taken independently of other units, is favorableto one candidate or the other. Otherwise it must be coded neutral. If a unit contains both favorable and unfavorable references to the samecandidate, or it contains only favorable or unfavorable references to bothcandidates, it should be coded neutral. If a unit contains one or more favorable references to one candidate and one ormore unfavorable references to the other candidate, only the first reference inthe sentence should be considered in coding. If there is uncertainty about how different people might interpret a unit, itshould be coded neutral.For purposes of assessing favorability, direct quotations and other attributedstatements are treated no differently from statements made by the article’s author, sincethe choice of one particular quote over another can also represent bias.  For example, thesentence, “Democrats accused Bush of misleading the nation about the justification forwar in Iraq,” would be coded as unfavorable to the president.The coding scheme attempts to make the rating process as objective as possible.However, coders’ personal biases could affect how they evaluate elements of the texts.While it is true that such coder subjectivity may skew balance scores of individual A Question of Balance — 11articles in one direction or another, it is still possible to compare average scores forGoogle News and Yahoo News and thus assess bias of one site relative to the other.Coding procedureTwo coders were used in this study.  A primary coder – the author of the study –analyzed all 100 texts.  A second coder – also a graduate student in communication withexperience in content analysis – analyzed 28 of the texts, selected at random, for thepurpose of assessing the validity of the coding scheme and the reliability of the primarycoder.  Articles were assigned to coders in random order using a computer-based codingsystem.  The coders had no knowledge of whether a particular article came via GoogleNews or Yahoo News (or which search term returned it).  Coders were given only theheadline and the name of the source organization for each article.  The coders weretrained and the coding scheme was initially tested using sample texts from articles notincluded in the actual sample.In addition to coding each sentence, coders were asked to assess the overallfavorability of the article in the form of two variables, each with five possible values: Overall favorability to Bush: highly favorable, favorable, neutral, unfavorable,highly unfavorable Overall favorability to Kerry: highly favorable, favorable, neutral,unfavorable, highly unfavorableThese overall favorability scores were intended only for the purpose of validatingthe unit-by-unit coding scheme and ultimately were discarded. A Question of Balance — 12Intercoder reliabilityIntercoder reliability is assessed on two levels: by sentence (the unit ofobservation) and by article (the unit of analysis).At the sentence level, Cohen’s kappa, a measure of agreement between coders onnominative variables, is computed as 0.72 – just above the 70% threshold considered anacceptable level of agreement.  When intercoder reliability is tested at the article level,the agreement between the two coders is closer.  Because the favorability scorescomputed for each article are ratio measurements, the two coders’ scores are fit againsteach other, with the r-square statistic used to express intercoder reliability.  Values of r-square for the Kerry favorability and Bush favorability variables are 0.94 and 0.90,respectively – indicating a relatively high level of agreement between the coders.When computing reliability using such a small number of measurements (only 28articles were coded by both coders), a single outlying value can greatly affect theoutcome. It was necessary to omit one such outlier from consideration in computingagreement on the Kerry favorability score. The offending score was for an article thatcontained only one sentence, which one coder deemed favorable to Kerry and the othercoder recorded as neutral. As a result, the article took a Kerry favorability score of 1 fromone coder and 0 from the other. This greatly affected the reliability calculation, causing r-square to plummet to 0.57.  The article was excluded from the data analysis, which iswhy the data show one article fewer for Yahoo News than for Google News.ResultsUsing the values for each sentence, two scores are calculated for each article, A Question of Balance — 13measuring the degree of the article’s overall favorability to each candidate. Bush andKerry favorability scores for each article are computed using the following formula:favorability score = (sum of favorable units) – (sum of unfavorable units)(total units coded)Favorability scores can thus take values of –1 (completely unfavorable) to 1(completely favorable), with 0 being neutral. For instance, a Kerry favorability score of–0.3 for an article would indicate that, on balance, 30% the content of an article isunfavorable to John Kerry (the actual proportion of unfavorable units might be 35% butoffset by 5% of units coded as favorable to Kerry). Because even the most biased articlescontain a lot of neutral (or irrelevant) content, the scores tend be closer to 0 than to eitherextreme.Two scatterplots – one for Google News and the other for Yahoo News – providea basic summary of the data. They show the two candidates’ favorability scores for eacharticle, plotted against each other. This facilitates comparison of the overall favorabilityof the two portals’ search results.Favorability plots by search engine -1-0.75-0.5-0.2500.250.50.751Kerry favorability-1-0.75-0.5-0.250.25.5.751Bush favorabilityGoogle News-1-0.75-0.5-0.2500.250.50.751Kerry favorability-1-0.75-0.5-0.250.25.5.751Bush favorabilityYahoo News A Question of Balance — 14Each data point represents an article, and its placement on the chart represents itsfavorability to the two candidates: Upper left quadrant: Article is favorable to Kerry and unfavorable to Bush Upper right quadrant: Article is favorable to both Lower right quadrant: Article is favorable to Bush and unfavorable to Kerry Lower left quadrant: Article is unfavorable to bothIn other words, articles in the upper right and lower left are more balanced thanthose in the upper left and lower right. Articles closer to the center are more neutral. Thecircular boundary is a density ellipse drawn around 90% of the data points, which makesit easier to see patterns in the data.  One fact that is not apparent in the scatterplots is thata large number of data points are at the coordinates (0, 0).  This is because many of thearticles – 22% for Google News and 45% for Yahoo News – exhibited no bias at all,either because they discussed both candidates with complete neutrality or because theywere not relevant to either candidate.  A glance at the two plots reveals what can be seenempirically in the search results from the two sites:  Articles returned in the searchesusing Google News are more likely to be biased in favor of one candidate and against theother, while those that turn up in the Yahoo News searches are generally more balanced.In order to illustrate article bias in one dimension, a measurement that takes intoaccount favorability ratings for both candidates is needed.  Two related scores are devisedfor this purpose.  The first, the article balance score, shows the degree to which articlesfavor one candidate over the other.  It is computed using a simple formula:balance score = kerry favorability – bush favorability A Question of Balance — 15An article’s balance score takes a value between –1 and 1, with positive numbersindicating greater favorability to Kerry and negative numbers indicating greaterfavorability to Bush.  Articles with balance scores of 0 are equally favorable (orunfavorable) to both candidates.Article balance scores by search engineBalance score-1-0.500.51 GoogleYahooSearch engineBy taking the average balance scores for articles returned by Google News andYahoo News, each search engine’s overall bias can be determined.  A balance score thatfavors Bush is presumed to show a conservative bias, while one that favors Kerry wouldindicate a liberal bias.  The average balance scores for both Google News and YahooNews are not significantly different from 0, indicating an absence of overall bias in thesearch results for both sites.  Thus, while the data do show bias in many of the articlesreturned by Google News, there is no evidence of an overall conservative (or liberal)slant to the site’s search results, as has been alleged.The second measurement, the article bias score, is simply the absolute value ofthe balance score.  It takes a value between 0 and 1 and represents the proportion of anarticle that is biased, regardless of the direction of bias.  For example, an article in which A Question of Balance — 16half the sentences are coded as favorable to Kerry and the other half as unfavorable toBush would have a bias score of 1, meaning 100% of the article is biased.  In fact, biasscores tend to be closer to 0, though one article returned by Google News had a bias scoreof 0.92.  The mean article bias score for each search engine describes the degree to whichthe average article returned by that search engine is likely to be biased.Article bias scores by search engineBias score00.20.40.60.81 GoogleYahooSearch engineAs seen in the plot above, the articles returned by Google News have a highermean bias score than those returned by Yahoo News (0.23 compared with 0.13, astatistically significant difference).  This means that a search on Google News is likely toturn up articles that are more biased than those returned by its competitor.Besides being coded for favorability, articles were also classified by whether theycame from an independent, online-only source (such as Salon.com) or a website affiliatedwith a traditional news source.  A traditional news source is defined as a wire service,newspaper, magazine, TV station, radio station, broadcast network or cable network.(Content from one of these sources that is syndicated on a news aggregator such asYahoo News is also classified as traditional.)  Of the articles returned by Google News,40% were from non-traditional news sources, while only 24% of the Yahoo News results A Question of Balance — 17came from non-traditional sources.  (See Appendix B for a list of the sources of all thearticles coded.)  Notably, almost all of the bias in Google News’s search results can beattributed to its use of non-traditional sources.  In other words, when articles from non-traditional sources are left out of the calculation, the average bias scores for Google Newsand Yahoo News are virtually identical.Finally, articles that exceeded the 25-sentence length limit for coding tended to bescored as slightly more biased than shorter articles, on average.  A possible explanationfor this is that most of the articles from traditional sources – those less likely to exhibitbias – were shorter than 25 sentences.  If this arbitrary limit were hindering the codingscheme’s ability to ascertain bias in longer texts, one would expect to find a loweraverage bias score for longer articles.DiscussionThe data show that articles returned in Google News searches are more likely tohave a bias toward a particular candidate than those returned in searches on Yahoo News,but there is no evidence of an overall conservative bias in search results on Google News,as has been suggested.  Both Google News and Yahoo News searches returned articlesthat were, on the whole, equally favorable to both George W. Bush and John Kerry.  Thisis what one would expect to see of balanced search results at a time when public opinionis evenly divided between the two candidates.Accordingly, the research hypothesis, H1, is rejected.For both candidates, a slight tendency toward negativism (that is, moreunfavorable content than favorable) can be seen in articles returned by the two news A Question of Balance — 18portals. This can be explained in two ways: By the time the data were collected – in the two weeks before the 2004general election – the race for the presidency had turned increasingly negative. The news media by their nature generally place greater emphasis on negativestories than positive ones.With the abundance of well-respected, credible sources on the Internet, why doesGoogle News return so many articles from biased sources?  An explanation offered byNathan Stoll, Google’s associate product manager for Google News, has to do with thesearch terms themselves (2004):  A search for “John Kerry” will first return entries inwhich the entire search term appears in the headline.  Even though Google Newsexamines the full text of articles when looking for a search term, it puts extra weight onthe headline when it ranks the results.  So, stories with headlines such as “John Kerry liesabout his record” will receive a higher rank than stories with headlines such as “Kerrycampaigns in Ohio” (omitting his first name).  Traditional media – which tend to be lessbiased than many alternative, online-only news sources – generally identify people inheadlines by their last names only.  As a result, articles from these news organizationsmay often be outranked in Google News search results by those from sites that do notfollow this practice.  Given this peculiarity, the use of full names in the searches analyzedhere could be seen as a weakness in the study, but in fact it emulates the behavior of anaverage user.  Unaware of the distinction, a user presumably is more likely to search for afull name than just a last name, resulting in a disproportionate number of results fromnon-traditional news sources.  Searches on Yahoo News do not appear to exhibit thistendency as frequently. A Question of Balance — 19It is important to understand that this study is not an indictment of Google News’spractice of automatically ranking the top stories on its front page and section fronts.While Google News’s ranking methods may be flawed, as some have charged, this studyis concerned only with the site’s search results.  It should also be noted that Google Newsdoes not distinguish between factual and opinion pieces in its search results (Stoll, 2004).Thus, an editorial may appear along with straight-news stories, even though the formerrepresents a particular point of view while the latter are supposed to be reasonablybalanced recitations of fact.  It is not clear that average users can make the distinction,especially given the many online-only sources that often peddle a confusing mixture offact and opinion.  Accordingly, this study makes no attempt to separate news fromeditorial content.The main flaws in the study are with the coding scheme.  Better coder training, amore detailed coding manual and a more precise definition of “favorability” wouldalmost certainly have improved intercoder reliability, which, while not low enough to callinto question the results, is below expectations.  Additionally, using sentences as units ofobservation makes for some ambiguity in the coding process.  If one sentence containsmultiple distinct propositions, or a single proposition stretches across multiple sentences,some of this granularity is lost in the current coding method.If users are looking for current factual information about a political candidate, thisstudy concludes that they are more likely to find it by searching Yahoo News.  If, on theother hand, users want a wide range of alternative viewpoints, then Google News may betheir best bet. A Question of Balance — 20ReferencesDallas, Jim. (2004) “From the Department of ‘Huh?’” Burnt Orange Report [weblog].Retrieved April 12, 2005, fromhttp://www.burntorangereport.com/archives/001234.htmlGaither, Chris. (2005, April 11). “Web Giants Go With Different Angles in Competitionfor News Audience.” Los Angeles Times, p. C-1.Google. (2004). About Google News. Retrieved Dec. 9, 2004, fromhttp://news.google.com/intl/en_us/about_google_news.htmlGroseclose, Tim, and Milyo, Jeff. (2003). A Measure of Media Bias [working paper].Retrieved Dec. 9, 2004, fromhttp://www.stanford.edu/~wacziarg/mediapapers/GrosecloseMilyo.pdfKrippendorff, Klaus. (1980). Content analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology.Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.Lasica, J.D. (2004, Sept. 24). Balancing act: how news portals serve up political stories.Online Journalism Review. Retrieved Dec. 9, 2004, fromhttp://ojr.org/ojr/technology/1095977436.phpLee, Martin A., and Solomon, Norman. (1990). Unreliable Sources: A Guide to DetectingBias in News Media. New York: Carol Publishing.Olsen, Stefanie, and Hansen, Evan. (2005, March 25). “All the news that robots pick.”CNET News.com. Retrieved April 28, 2005, from http://news.com.com/2100-1038_3-5635161.htmlStoll, Nathan. (2004, Nov. 13). [personal communication with Google News associateproduct manager]Tabarrok, Alex. (2004). “Surprise! Fox News Is Fair and Balanced!” MarginalRevolution [weblog]. Retrieved April 12, 2005, fromhttp://www.marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2003/09/surprise_fox_is.htmlWeber, Robert Philip. (1990). Basic Content Analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. A Question of Balance — 21Appendix A: Coding instructionsProcedureWhen you are assigned an article to code, you will evaluate it in two ways: unit-by-unit and overall. The units of observation are sentences. When you code unit-by-unit,you must consider only the individual unit you are coding. When you code the articleoverall, you can consider aspects of the article, such as the headline, that can't be takeninto account in a unit-by-unit analysis. If there are any technical or proceduralirregularities in the coding, please make a note of it in the comments field.When you have completed the coding process for an article, double-check yourresponse (since you can't go back) and hit the "Submit responses" button. Your responseswill be recorded, and you'll be given the opportunity to continue on to another article.GuidelinesWe are looking for favorable and unfavorable references to John Kerry in theresults of a search on his name, and the same for George W. Bush. You will be codingthe text of articles returned in search queries Yahoo News and Google News.To keep coders from spending an inordinate amount of time on any one story,stories longer than 25 units (sentences) will be truncated. Most stories are shorter thanthis anyway.Here are the basic rules for coding individual units: A Question of Balance — 22 A unit can only be coded as favorable or unfavorable if it contains anunambiguous message that, taken independently of other units, is favorable toone candidate or the other. Otherwise it must be coded neutral. If a unit contains both favorable and unfavorable references to the samecandidate, or it contains only favorable or unfavorable references to bothcandidates, it should be coded neutral. If a unit contains one or more favorable references to one candidate and one ormore unfavorable references to the other candidate, only the first reference inthe sentence should be considered in coding. If there is uncertainty about how different people might interpret a unit, itshould be coded neutral.On the coding form, mark each sentence as favorable to Bush, favorable to Kerry,unfavorable to Bush, unfavorable to Kerry or neutral. Please observe the followingdefinitions when considering what are favorable and unfavorable references.The following may be considered favorable or unfavorable references: Direct references to the candidate (by name or other obvious identifier -- e.g.,"my opponent", "the senator") Quotes from candidates (or their surrogates) about themselves or each other References to actions or statements by the Bush or Kerry campaigns News directly related to candidates' issues or policies where it is clear that thenews is damaging or helpful to a particular candidate The following should be left marked as "netural": A Question of Balance — 23 Mentions of the actions of parties, aides, colleagues, etc., unless they aredirectly related to the campaign General ideological assertions and political observations that are subjectiveand can't be considered positive or negative for either candidate (e.g., "biggovernment is bad" or "social security is broken") Any citation of poll results (since it is difficult to weight poll results fairly) Any mention that cannot be clearly determined to be favorable or unfavorableto a particular candidateWhat constitutes favorable and unfavorable? If a reference cannot be clearly construed as favorable or unfavorable (e.g.,"John Kerry has a rich wife" could be interpreted either way), it should beignored Instances where a favorable adjective is used to describe a neutral orunfavorable action (e.g., "...efficient in his criticism of Bush") do not count asa favorable mention. Same with unfavorable adjectives. Historical references can be coded as favorable or unfavorable only if there isa clear relationship to the candidate and it can be clearly discerned as beingfavorable or unfavorable (e.g., "Truman didn't apologize for war mistakes, soBush shouldn't have to either" could be coded as favorable to Bush) If a candidate's actual or alleged associate or ally is portrayed negatively (orpositively), the ally's relationship to the candidate counts as a singleunfavorable (favorable) reference. (e.g., "Arafat is a murderer. Arafat is a A Question of Balance — 24thug. Arafat is derailing the peace process. Arafat endorses Kerry." Only thelast sentence is coded as unfavorable to Kerry.) A Question of Balance — 25Appendix B: Sources of articles returnedYahoo News returned more articles from traditional media sources (in boldface)than Google News did.  A traditional news source is defined as a wire service,newspaper, magazine, TV station, radio station, broadcast network or cable network,accessed either directly or through a news aggregator.Google NewsVOANewstruthoutChicago MaroonFt. Worth Star-TelegramDaytona Beach News-JournalNME.comUselessKnowledge.comUnconfirmedSources.comThe Jewish PressPRNewswireAxisofLogicThe (Carlisle, Pa.) SentinelSioux Falls Argus Leader quoted on Lucianne.comBiloxi (Miss.) Sun-HeraldDenver Post quoted on Lucianne.comBloombergCBC News (Canada)VOANewsJerusalem PostInternational Herald TribuneNew York PostUselessKnowledge.comXinhuaAP via San Jose Mercury NewsAP via Duluth News TribuneSalon.comBloombergThe AustralianINDOlinkLawrence (Kan.) Journal-WorldCNNAP via canada.comBusiness-Standard.com (India)MichNews.comRushLimbaugh.comTVM (Maldives) via MaldivesInfoPRNewswire via Yahoo NewsMichNews.comwestcoastmusicReadaBet.comThisDay (Nigeria) via AllAfrica.comAP via Canada.comThe Washington DispatchRushLimbaugh.comUselessKnowledge.coms5000.comWashington Times via The Conservative VoiceTVM (Maldives) via MaldivesInfoScranton (Pa.) Times TribuneAP via WHEC-TV (Rochester, N.Y.)(60% traditional media sources)Yahoo NewsChannelNewsAsia.comTheWGALChannel.com (Harrisburg, Pa.)Whitehouse.govTheWGALChannel.com (Harrisburg, Pa.)APPRNewswire via Yahoo NewsPRNewswireWhitehouse.govWhitehouse.govGuardian Unlimited (U.K.)The Southern IllinoisanAP via Daily Herald (Arlington Heights, Ill.)The Smoking GunAFP via Yahoo NewsWhitehouse.govBloombergAFPWCPO.com (Cincinnati)New Zealand HeraldAPAP via Yahoo NewsWPXI.com (Pittsburgh)AP via Duluth News TribuneIndia DailyAFP via Yahoo NewsBloombergINDOlinkKnight RidderBloombergReuters via Australian Broadcasting Corp.AP via Canada.comWhiteHouse.govWorldNetDaily.comWhitehouse.govAP via PhillyBurbs.com (N.J.)PRNewswire via Yahoo NewsKyodo News via Yahoo AsiaAP via WNEP-TV (Scranton, Pa.)AP via Canada.comKYW Newsradio 1060 (Philadelphia)The (Youngstown, Ohio) VindicatorThe Times of IndiaAP via Canada.comIndieWireIndia OnlineAP via WHEC-TV (Rochester, N.Y.)AFP via Khaleej Times (U.A.E.)Editor and Publisher via Yahoo NewsAP via Yahoo News(76% traditional media sources)