 ORIGINAL PAPER Biased Judgment of Political Bias: Perceived Ideological Distance Increases Perceptions of Political Bias Omer Yair •Raanan Sulitzeanu-Kenan Published online: 12 June 2014 /C211Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014 Abstract Accusations of political bias in the mass media, academia, the courts and various other institutions are common in many democracies. However, despite the prevalence of these accusations and the public attention they have received, research on the effects of perceived ideological distance on perceptions of political bias is lacking. Focusing on perceptions of political bias in academia, and drawing on a survey of 1,257 students in social science and law faculties in ﬁve Israeli universities, we show that the perceived ideological distance between a student and her set of professors increases perceptions of politically biased behavior of pro- fessors, and that the effects of ‘left-wing’ and ‘right-wing’ ideological distances are not symmetric. Possible implications and directions for further research are then suggested. Keywords Political bias /C1Perceptions /C1Ideological distance /C1Motivated reasoning /C1Higher education Allegations of political bias are prevalent in many democracies. In such countries, individuals working in various institutions (e.g., the courts, mass media, academia, the military) are accused of being biased in favor of a certain ideological Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi: 10.1007/s11109-014-9278-0 ) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. O. Yair (&) Department of Political Science, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mount Scopus, 91905 Jerusalem, Israel e-mail: omer.yair@mail.huji.ac.il R. Sulitzeanu-Kenan Department of Political Science and the Federmann School of Public Policy and Government, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel e-mail: raanan.s-k@mail.huji.ac.il 123Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 DOI 10.1007/s11109-014-9278-0 orientation. In the United States, for example, such public accusations are often leveled against the media (e.g., Watts et al. 1999 , pp. 144–145) and the academy (e.g., Horowitz 2006 ).1 Perceptions of political bias appear to engender negative consequences. Such perceptions regarding the media result in lower trust in the media (e.g., Tsfati andCohen 2005 ), and students who perceive bias in their professors censor their own political views in class in order to preserve their grades (e.g., Kashti 2009 ; Linvill and Havice 2011 ). Understanding the determinants of perceived political bias could therefore help both individuals accused of political bias in different institutions anddecision makers to design and implement policies aimed at reducing suchperceptions, whereby possibly increasing the public legitimacy of these institutions (see also Smith et al. 2008 , chapter 8). Indeed, much research is devoted to understanding the determinants of perceived political bias, mainly concerning themedia (e.g., Vallone et al. 1985 ; Eveland and Shah 2003 ; Lee 2005 ). However, despite robust ﬁndings in social psychology that people tend to attribute bias to others with whom they disagree, especially in value-laden domains (e.g., Rossand Ward 1996 ; Pronin et al. 2004 ), there are almost no studies that have investigated the effects of perceived ideological distances and disagreements on perceptions ofpolitical bias in social institutions, with only a few notable exceptions, focusing on bias in the media (Gunther et al. 2001 ; Turner 2007 ;F e l d m a n 2011 ). Yet these studies examined such effects only with regard to perceived bias in media coverage ofspeciﬁc issues or speciﬁc news channels, whereas perceived political bias in themedia in general could be more important in shaping viewers’ attitudes towards themedia (see D’Alession and Allen 2000 ,p .1 3 7 ) . In this study we directly address this issue by focusing on the formation of judgments of political bias in academia—one of the least explored, yet intenselydebated institutional settings of this phenomenon. We draw on a survey of 1,257 students in social sciences and law faculties in ﬁve Israeli universities. Our ﬁndings show that perceived ideological distance between a student and her set of professorssubstantially increases perceptions of political bias, constituting bias in the judgmentof political bias. However, this effect is manifested only when the student evaluatesher professors to be more left-leaning than herself. One inherent limitation of ourstudy is that in the absence of an objective measure of the actual level of professors’bias, we cannot determine whether students who are ideologically proximate to theirprofessors underestimate the true politically biased behavior of their professors, or whether students who are ideologically distant overestimate this behavior. Still, the study importantly shows that students are affected by their perceived ideologicaldistance from their professors in making these judgments. The paper proceeds as follows: we begin by deﬁning political bias; next we focus on the case of the academy and consider the ways in which political bias ismanifested in the classrooms of academic institutions. In the third section, wepresent a theoretical justiﬁcation for our hypotheses regarding the determinants ofperceived political bias. The fourth section discusses the method and measures used 1Similarly, in Israel there are allegations of political bias in the media (e.g., Gur 2010 ), the academy (e.g., Im Tirzu 2011 ; Shamir 2012 ) and the Supreme Court (e.g., Lis 2011 ).488 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 in the analyses, followed by a presentation of the main ﬁndings. Finally, we discuss the possible implications of our ﬁndings and suggest directions for further research. What is Political Bias? Despite the frequent use of the term political bias, a clear and accepted deﬁnition of this concept is surprisingly absent. For the purpose of this study, we consider‘‘political bias’’ as denoting the effects of political preferences on judgment and behavior, where such effects are considered irrelevant and/or inappropriate . Political bias, like other mental biases, may occur both consciously and unconsciously. People may well fail to disregard their political preferences in their decisions and actions, even when they consciously accept that these preferencesshould not play a role. 2 Our deﬁnition admittedly entails a normative and subjective judgment (see also Wilson and Brekke 1994 , p. 120). There are many instances in which political preferences are not deemed irrelevant or inappropriate to choice and behavior, andthus will not be considered as bias. Obviously, citizens’ choices at the ballot box arelegitimately guided by their political preferences, as are public expressions made by individuals in demonstrations, blogs etc. Many people, however, would deem inappropriate the effect of such political and ideological preferences on the conductof people working in different institutions such as the courts, the media and theacademy, since such people are expected to strive for objectivity and to actimpartially (e.g., Lee 2005 , p. 45; General Report of the Committee on Academic Freedom and Academic Tenure (1915), cited at ACTA 2005 , p. 15). In this study we focus on the formation of perceptions of political bias in higher education. While public allegations regarding political bias of academy professors are prevalent (Bauerlein 2004 ), and are considered a ‘‘serious problem’’ by a large proportion of the US population (Gross and Simmons 2006 , p. 11), the existing study of political bias has almost entirely focused on other institutions, such as themass media and the courts. Like media organizations and courts, academicinstitutions have their own unique features, requiring us to design our research in away that takes these into account. Our aim is thus twofold: to generate conclusionsregarding the nature of perceptions of political bias that are generalizable beyond the particular setting of the academy; and to provide insights into this political- psychological phenomenon in the context of the academy, with the hope of contributing systematic data and understandings to the intense, yet often poorlyevidenced debate over this issue. Political Bias in the Academy Recent years have seen numerous accusations regarding political bias in academy classrooms, in a number of democracies. These accusations, originating mostly on 2For a review on the unconsciousness of many mental biases, see Wilson and Brekke ( 1994 ).Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 489 123 the political right, allege that professors, typically from social sciences and humanities faculties, present left-leaning perspectives in the classroom, castigatestudents who express opposite views, give higher grades to students who express liberal views, and try to indoctrinate their students (e.g., Horowitz 2006 ; Detroit Local 2012 ). 3Some scholars have suggested that students react to such political bias by self-censoring their political views, and attempt to incorporate their professors’positions in their written assignments (Kashti 2009 ; Linvill and Havice 2011 ), and Dixon and McCabe ( 2006 ) show that students positively evaluate professors whom they perceive as presenting ‘‘balanced’’ views and inviting criticism of their ideas.Moreover, others warn that such perceptions of political bias ‘‘could hurt publichigher education’’ as they could cause a reduction in public spending for higher education (Smith et al. 2008 , p. 161). Yet, despite the attention this issue has attracted, we know rather little about the determinants that may shape these subjective experiences, beyond the actual conductof their professors. A few recent studies have examined the causes of students’perceptions of political bias in class. These have shown that some of the speciﬁcpsychological attributes of students account for their perceptions of their professors asbiased (Linvill 2011 ;L i n v i l la n dM a z e r 2013 ). These studies, however, have relied on relatively small and unrepresentative samples, and have not attempted to study the possible role of perceived ideological distance on perceived political bias. It should be noted that in this paper we do not attempt to examine whether and to what extent there ispolitical bias in academy classrooms. Rather, we seek to study students’ perceptions of political bias in their professors’ teaching activity. AsMachina ( 1987 , p. 20) argues, students’ perceptions are ‘‘not necessarily accurate representations of the objective facts, but they nevertheless constitute [ …]t h e entirety of the student end of the teaching process’ ’ (emphasis in original). In other words,perceptions, however subjective, matter considerably (see also Ross and Ward 1996 ). Determinants of Perceived Political Bias in the Academy Students’ Political Bias in Judging Professors’ Political BiasAn important element of perceived political bias is the fact that it is a subjective judgment made by students, and as such, this judgment may itself be biased (Vallone et al. 1985 ; Gunther 1992 ). In general, people tend to attribute bias to individuals and institutions with whom they perceive disagreement (e.g., Ross and Ward 1996 ;P r o n i n et al. 2004 ; Sulitzeanu-Kenan 2006 ). According to ‘‘naı ¨ve realism’ ’ theory (Ross and Ward 1996 ), people believe that they see the world in an objective and rational manner, and they tend to attribute bias and irrationality to others who see the worlddifferently and who disagree with them (Robinson et al. 1995 ; Frantz 2006 ; Kennedy and Pronin 2008 ). 4Moreover, the greater the disagreement, especially on value-laden issues, the more bias and lack of objectiveness people attribute to disagreeing others 3For similar claims in Israel, see Kashti ( 2009 ), Im Tirzu ( 2011 ), Halutz ( 2012 ), and Shamir ( 2012 ). 4For a review, see Pronin et al. ( 2004 ).490 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 (Cohen 2003 ;P r o n i ne ta l . 2004 , pp. 789–790). Other studies have shown that people tend to attribute negative motives (selﬁsh, egocentric) to others holding opposingviewpoints (Reeder et al. 2005 ). Relying on these ﬁndings, we expect perceived political bias to be affected by the perceived ideological distance between the evaluating student and her set ofprofessors such that the greater this perceived ideological distance, the more thestudent will attribute bias to her professors. This expectation is also congruent withﬁndings in the motivated reasoning literature, which suggest that when exposed toinformation or attitudes that contradict their views and opinions, people tend toexamine the contradicting information or attitude more rigorously and thoroughly,to counter-argue and discount it, and to derogate the source of contradicting information. In contrast, like-minded information or attitudes typically lead to effortless agreement, and positive source appraisal (Lord et al. 1979 ; Lapinski and Bolster 2001 ; Taber and Lodge 2006 ; Nir 2011 ). Accordingly, we expect that upon encountering information and views that contradict, question, or even merely fail tosustain her own opinions, the student will become motivated to maintain herpreexisting beliefs and to rebut contradicting views and information communicatedby the professors in class, by perceiving their messages and conduct as biased(Eagly et al. 2000 ; Lapinski and Bolster 2001 ; Kelly-Woessner and Woessner 2006 , pp. 495–496). We therefore hypothesize that: H1 The greater the perceived ideological distance between a student and her professors, the higher the perceived political bias she reports. This hypothesis posits that the judgment of political bias in the classroom is in itself politically biased, since the ideological distance is prima facie irrelevant to thejudgment of professors’ bias. However, one inherent limitation in identifying such abias stems from the lack of an objective measure of the actual level of professors’ political bias. Under such conditions, we cannot determine whether students who are ideological proximate to their professors underestimate the true politicallybiased behavior of their professors, or whether students who are ideologicallydistant overestimate this behavior. Still, identifying that students are affected byperceived ideological distance from their professors in making these judgmentsindicates the existence of a bias, notwithstanding our inability to identify its origin.Such ‘‘relative bias’’ (Stanig 2013 , p. 732) is prevalent in studies of social biases where, in the absence of an objective reference response, researchers can only detect overall effects of presumably irrelevant considerations on judgments or behaviors, but not who was more or less affected by these considerations (e.g., Gazal-Ayal andSulitzeanu-Kenan 2010 ; Bar and Zussman 2012 ). In this study we chose to ask students about their professors as a group, rather than about individual professors. This choice follows the conception of perceptionsof political bias as a structural experience (see also Linvill and Havice 2011 , p. 490). During their studies, students are taught by several professors who behave and teachdifferently, and students’ evaluations of one professor are likely to be affected by the behaviors and teachings of others. Accordingly, we believe that one should investigate students’ evaluations of their group of professors in order to gather amore complete and representative understanding of the perceptions of political bias.Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 491 123 Several studies have shown that people with stronger attitudes tend to defend them more and to exert more cognitive effort in doing so compared with people withweaker attitudes (Eagly et al. 2000 ; Taber and Lodge 2006 ; see also Reeder et al. 2005 ). Thus, we expect that students who perceive ideological differences between themselves and their professors, and who are also interested in politics, will tend toperceive their professors as more biased compared with students who perceivesimilar ideological differences but are less interested in politics. In other words, wehypothesize that the effect of the perceived ideological distance between a studentand her professors on her judgment of perceived political bias will be moderated byher level of political interest: H2 The effect of the perceived ideological distance on perceived political bias will be stronger when political interest is high, and weaker when political interest is low. Method To test these hypotheses we rely on an original survey which was administered in mandatory undergraduate courses in ﬁve Israeli universities. The survey was ﬁeldedduring the second half of the spring semester, in order to allow students enough timeto form impressions regarding all their professors. The survey was presented tostudents as addressing the quality of teaching in the speciﬁc department, as part of awider study taking place in several universities. Students were not offered any reward in return for (voluntarily) completing the questionnaire. SampleOur survey draws on a sample of 1,257 undergraduates, surveyed in May and June of 2012, from Political Science, Sociology, Communications and Law Departments in ﬁveuniversities in Israel. 5These academic departments were selected since many of their courses include value-laden and political topics (see also Dixon and McCabe 2006 , p. 112). Undergraduates were chosen because they constitute a larger population than graduate students, and since accusations of political bias in the academy are directedmainly at professors teaching undergraduates (Losco and Deollos 2007 ,p .2 5 5 ) . Respondents were recruited by sending requests to professors who taught mandatory courses in the relevant departments, asking their permission to distributethe questionnaire in their classes. Mandatory courses were chosen in order to reducethe potential for self-selection of students into particular courses. Additionally, suchcourses include practically all the students in a cohort (deﬁned by the university, department, and year). 6In total, we received agreement to distribute the questionnaire in 32 out of 49 cohorts, a response rate of 65.3 %. One cohort wasnot surveyed due to unrelated logistic reasons, resulting in 31 cohorts surveyed. 5These were all the universities in Israel which had such departments at the time: Bar-Ilan University, Ben-Gurion University, Haifa University, Hebrew University, and Tel-Aviv University. 6There were four cases in which there were two cohorts at a certain department in the same year. In these cases we treated each as a distinct cohort.492 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 Such a response rate is rather high, but the threat of selection bias remains, as professors whose perceived behavior is in question are also in a position todetermine the inclusion of cohorts in the survey. However, the sampling method uniquely enables us to assess the potential effect of the selection on our estimates, by identifying cohorts with different probabilities of inclusion in the survey P(CI). The 31 cohorts that were surveyed included 9 for which we did not obtain anagreement from one professor (teaching one course), but later received anagreement from another. These 9 cohorts—identiﬁed as ‘partial refusal’ cohorts—are assumed to have a lower inclusion probability than other surveyed cohorts. 7By including a dummy variable for ‘partial refusal’ identifying these cohorts in theregression analyses, we are able to allow the dependent variable to vary across the two levels of inclusion probability, and to assess whether our main coefﬁcient estimates are affected by the selection process. Overall, owing to the fact that we handed out questionnaires in mandatory courses only, our sample consists mainly of ﬁrst-year students (63.8 % of the sample), 8but the median age of the sample, like the sample’s proportion of women, is very similarto that of the population of students in the social sciences and law faculties, as of2009. 9However, the proportion of Arab students in our sample (3.1 %) is much less than that in the student population (11.5 %; Z =- 9.24, p\.001). Research Variables Our theoretical and empirical approach to the study of perceived political bias is premised on the assumption that a student’s experience of political bias isconstructed by her combined exposure to a set of professors. Accordingly, ourmeasurements address perceptions of each student regarding the entire set of her professors, as detailed below. Perceived Political BiasRelying mainly on the works of Tollini ( 2009 ,2010 ), our perceived political bias measure includes seven items reporting the incidence of experiencing each of sevenbehaviors. 10For each item the students were asked to rate the degree or frequency of a certain behavior on a 5-point scale (1—‘‘not at all’’, 5—‘‘very often’’). Students 7The theoretical relative probabilities of inclusion are thus as follows: P CI jRefusal/C0/C1 [ PC I jpartial refusal ðÞ [PC I jRefusalðÞ : 8Of the remainder, 25.8 % are second-year students, 9.5 % are third-year students, and fourth- or ﬁfth- year students compromise 1 percent of the sample. 9The median age of the sample is 24, whereas the real population’s median age was 24.5. The sample’s proportion of women (61.4 %) is insigniﬁcantly different from the real population’s proportion of women(59.4 %; Z =1.43, p\.15). Data on the student population of 2009, the most recent data available for Israeli university students, was taken from the Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics ( 2013 ). 10The wording of all seven questions composing the Perceived Political Bias variable is shown in Appendix 1. We note that the construction of these seven items, in particular our sixth item, was complemented by the items suggested by Linvill and Havice ( 2011 ).Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 493 123 were instructed to address their answers only to professors who taught them in their speciﬁc department and in the current academic year. The seven items were found tobe highly correlated ( a=.80) and exploratory factor analysis on these items yielded one factor with eigenvalue [1 (proportion of variance explained: 94 %), indicating a good construct validity. We therefore constructed a perceived politicalbias score for each student by averaging her scores on all seven items. The resultingscale was adjusted to vary between 0 and 1. Perceived Ideological DistanceSince our measure of perceived ideological distance refers to a student and her setof professors, we constructed a novel measure that amasses this distance across the entire set. This measure is based on three items in the questionnaire. First, eachstudent was asked to write down the total number of the professors who taught herin the current academic year in the relevant department. In the second item, eachstudent was asked to identify how many of these professors occupy each cell on a7-point left–right ideological scale. 11Students were also able to designate the number of professors whose ideological position they could not determine.12The third and ﬁnal item was a standard question of self-placement on a similar 7-point left–right scale. In order to calculate the perceived ideological distance between a student and her professors we adapted a simple mean squared difference equation. For each studentwe calculated the mean squared differences between her political position and theperceived political positions of the professors whose political position she reported.As noted above, it is quite possible that students have also encountered professorswhose political position they could not determine. Since it is reasonable to expectthat such ideologically ‘‘unidentiﬁed’’ professors will not contribute to the overall perceived ideological distance between the student and her set of professors as they most likely did not express their political views in class, we divided the sum ofsquared differences by the number of allthe professors that taught the student, whether their political position was determined or not. 13 11It should be noted that while in most countries the policy content of principal axes of competition is the classical left–right, in Israel (and Turkey) the main policy dimension is the hawk vs. dove approach to regional conﬂicts and security (Benoit and Laver 2006 ). Still, comparative studies have shown that ideology in the Israeli context has similar psychological determinants (Jost et al. 2003 ) and political implications (e.g., vote choice: Bargsted and Kedar 2009 ; and policy preference formation: Sulitzeanu- Kenan and Halperin 2013 ) as in other countries. 12The ﬁrst item was intended to extract from the student’s memory the total number of her professors, and in the second item the student could rely on her previous answer in verifying that she actuallyassigned all of her professors to the eight possible cells. 13We note that by doing so, we treat these ideologically unidentiﬁed professors as professors whom the students perceived as ideologically proximate. However, we suggest that perceptions of political bias inone’s professors are a structural experience (see above), in which allthe professors the student is exposed to inﬂuence her learning experience. Therefore, since we asked students to evaluate the behaviors of alltheir professors, omitting these ideologically unidentiﬁed professors from our measure of perceivedideological distance could result in an incomprehensive measure of ideological distance. Nonetheless, inorder to assess the robustness of our ﬁndings to this speciﬁcation choice, a measure of perceivedideological distance in which the denominator was composed of the number of ideologically identiﬁed494 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 However, this measure is not independent from another quality of the set of professors—namely their ideological variance. The more ideologically varied theyare perceived to be by the student, the bigger will be the minimal value of the perceived ideological distance (for a similar analysis in a different context, see Achen 1978 , pp. 487–488). 14In order to attain a measure of perceived ideological distance that is independent from the perceived ideological variance of professors,we subtract the standard deviation of this measure from the basic measure asfollows: Perceived ideological distance ¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ Pnp i¼1Is/C0Ipi/C0/C12 Nps /C0ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃPnp i¼1Ip/C0Ipi/C0/C12 Nps where npis the number of ideologically identiﬁed professors, Isis the self-reported student’s ideology, Ipiis the perceived ideology of the student’s ith professor, Ipis the mean professors’ ideology, and Npis the total number of professors who had taught the student (including ideologically unidentiﬁed professors). This quantityestimates the mean squared perceived ideological distance between a student andthe mean ideology of her set of professors, and we use this measure as our perceivedideological distance measure. Control Variables Given that our interest is in students’ perceptions of political bias, we naturally control for the student’s own ideological position ( ideological position) . For this purpose we use the standard left–right self-placement question, with a 7-point scale(1—extreme right, and 7—extreme left). An additional utility of this variable is as aproxy for prior beliefs in political bias in the academy. Media bias research in the US has shown that the tendency to identify political bias is often asymmetric, with right-wing supporters more often reporting media bias (Eveland and Shah 2003 ; Lee 2005 ). Moreover, that literature has also shown that people already believing the media is biased, tend to report more bias than others when assessing speciﬁc mediacontent (e.g., Giner-Sorolla and Chaiken 1994 ). In the Israeli context, accusations of Footnote 13 continued professors was included in our robustness tests. Our substantive ﬁndings were not found to be sensitive to this measurement choice. We also note that 104 out of 1,257 students did not assign a political position to anyof their professors, and thus we could not calculate a Perceived Ideological Distance score for these students and they were excluded from our multivariate analyses. While this could somewhat bias ourresults, these students, as could have been expected, had much lower Perceived Political Bias scores(M=.12,SD=.10) than students who evaluated the ideological position of at least one of their pro- fessors ( M=.27,SD=.17), ( t(1,118) =9.07, p\.001), and this, to a certain degree, supports our ﬁrst hypothesis. 14For a simple intuitive demonstration consider a set of professors with no variation among their ideological positions, and assume that the student’s ideological position is identical. In this case thePerceived Ideological Distance measure will be zero. However, if the mean ideological position of theprofessors remains the same (and equal to that of the student) but their variance increases, the PerceivedIdeological Distance will necessarily equal the professors’ ideological variance.Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 495 123 political bias in universities have originated almost entirely from the political right (e.g., Im Tirzu 2011 ). Thus, a student’s ideology potentially controls for her prior beliefs regarding the existence and extent of political bias in the academy (see also Lee2005 , pp. 47–48). Earlier we noted that forming an impression about the existence of political bias can be thought of as a structural experience. Behaviors associated with political biasare characterized by favoring particular opinions and attitudes and by denigration ofothers. Such behaviors are expected to create selectively auspicious conditions forconforming attitudes to thrive in, while opposing views are likely to be excluded orsilenced. Thus, students who encounter homogeneous expressions of political viewsacross their set of professors are more likely to infer political bias, in a sort of backward induction, while those who come across diverse political views are less likely to attribute political bias to their diverse set of professors. In order to assess the student’s perceived ideological diversity among her set of professors ( perceived professors’ ideological diversity ), we once again used the 7-point left–right scale (joined by the ‘‘ideologically unidentiﬁed professors’’ cell)in which each student indicated how many of her professors occupy each cell. Toconstruct the diversity measure we counted the number of non-empty cells in thisscale for each student, resulting in a count variable that ranges from 1 to 8, where higher scores indicate more diversity. Some students may encounter very few professors who address issues with political connotations, while some may encounter more. Accordingly, we alsocontrol for the number of professors whose political position the student chose toestimate ( number of ideologically identiﬁed professors ). Additionally, in line with Lee ( 2005 ), who suggests that low levels of generalized or social trust are associated with perceptions of bias, we control for the student’s level of generalized trust , relying on a 5-point scale standard generalized trust question. In addition, we asked students questions tapping their level of interest in politics as well as questions on various demographic attributes. As noted above, our sample includes 9 cohorts for which we obtained ‘partial refusal’ to include in the survey (see section ‘‘ Method ’’ above). By including a dummy variable for ‘partial refusal’ ( partial refusal cohort ) identifying these cohorts in the regression analyses, we allow the dependent variable to vary acrossthe two levels of inclusion probability, and we can assess whether our maincoefﬁcient estimates are affected by the selection process. 15In the robustness tests we conducted separate analyses for the two groups of cohorts in order to assess the sensitivity of our ﬁndings to this source of selection bias. Instructional Manipulation CheckSurvey research requires respondents to pay attention to questions and instructions, but often they do not. To address this concern, our questionnaire included aninstructional manipulation check (IMC) (Oppenheimer et al. 2009 )—a single-item 15Students in these 9 cohorts amounted to one quarter of the sample (316 out of 1,257), and they did not signiﬁcantly differ from the other students in any of the demographic variables.496 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 tool for detecting respondents who are not following textual instructions, or satisﬁce in reading and answering survey questions. Overall, 656 out of 1,257 students(52.2 %) passed the IMC. Later we show that omitting students who failed in the IMC from the multivariate regression models considerably increases the models’ goodness-of-ﬁt. Results Section 1 in the Online Resource reports summary statistics for all dependent and independent variables. Overall, the average perceived political bias score is rather low, albeit not substantively insigniﬁcant: 0.25 on a 0–1 scale, i.e., perceptions of politically biased behavior of professors were reported, but they are rather modest.These results are similar to the levels of perceive political bias found in a fewstudies in the United States (Smith et al. 2008 , chapter 8; Dixon and McCabe 2006 ). There were, however, differences in the reported means of certain behaviors, fromas low as 0.1 (professors were unwilling to hear political opinions which did notmatch their own) to 0.44 (professors expressed their personal political opinionsduring classes). In addition, the distribution of the perceived political bias score is skewed to the left (median =0.21) with only a few observations in the right tail of the distribution. Determinants of Perceived Political BiasWhat causes students to perceive their professors as behaving in a politically biased manner? Table 1presents a set of OLS regression models with perceived political bias as dependent variable. 16First, in order to assess the utility of the IMC screener, Model 1 relies on the entire sample, whereas Model 2 includes only students who cleared the IMC screener. Results in the two models are rather similar, butexcluding students who failed the IMC resulted in a much higher goodness-of-ﬁt.Our subsequent analyses are therefore based on this more reliable sample. Examining the results of Model 2 we can see that as hypothesized, the coefﬁcient of perceived ideological distance variable is positive and statistically signiﬁcant.Holding all other variables in Model 2 at their means, a perceived ideologicaldistance score of one standard deviation below the mean yields a perceived political bias score of 0.20, whereas a perceived ideological distance score of one standard deviation above the mean yields a perceived political bias score of 0.32. Perceivedideological distance is also by far the most important predictor of perceived politicalbias, with a standardized coefﬁcient of .39, while the next biggest standardizedcoefﬁcient for any of the other regressors in Model 2 is .15. These results provide 16All regression models in this paper were run with dummy variables for the different departments and universities, to account for the speciﬁc effect of each department and university on the dependentvariables. In addition, in our questionnaire we also asked the students several other questions regardingtheir learning experience, and we varied the question order in our questionnaires, creating fourquestionnaire versions (see fn. 19 below). In order to account for the possible effect of the questionnaireversions, we also ran the models with dummy variables for each version but one.Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 497 123 support for Hypothesis 1. Looking at Model 2 we can also see that Age and Number of Ideologically Identiﬁed Professors are positively associated with perceivedpolitical bias. The positive association with the Number of Ideologically IdentiﬁedProfessors supports our theoretical expectation, and the merit of controlling for it inthis analysis. The coefﬁcient for the student’s ideological position is in the expected direction, as students from the political left report less perceived political bias, but it isstatistically insigniﬁcant, 17as is the coefﬁcient for the Perceived Professors’ Ideological Diversity. Therefore, students’ perception of political bias in theirprofessors is much more affected by perceived ideological distances than by anyideological position of the student, where the latter can also be thought of as theTable 1 Determinants of perceived political bias in the classroom Model 1— entire sampleModel 2—IMC approved sampleModel 3 Model 4 Perceived ideological distance .041 (.006)*** .058 (.008)*** .022 (.022) .078 (.010)*** Age .007 (.003)* .011 (.004)* .011 (.004)** .010 (.004)*Gender (female) .027 (.016) .026 (.021) .026 (.021) .020 (.021)Socio-economic status -.001 (.005) .007 (.007) .006 (.007) .006 (.007) Religiosity -.001 (.007) .008 (.010) .007 (.010) .008 (.010) Generalized trust -.009 (.005) /C160 .005 (.006) .004 (.006) .002 (.006) Political interest .012 (.005)* .014 (.007) /C160 .003 (.009) .015 (.007)* Ideological position -.011 (.005)* -.009 (.007) -.008 (.006) .008 (.010) Perceived professors’ ideological diversity.007(.005) .003 (.008) .004 (.008) .009 (.008) Number of ideologically identiﬁed professors.012 (.003)*** .013 (.004)*** .012 (.004)** .013 (.003)*** Partial refusal cohort .037 (.016)* .052 (.023)* .052 (.022)* .048 (.021)* Perceived ideological distance 9political interest.010 (.006) Right-gap .013 (.019) Right-gap 9perceived ideological distance-.107 (.022)*** Constant -.070 (.096) -.281 (.129)* -.238 (.127) -.346 (.125)** N 949 530 530 530 Model’s Fstatistic 16.84*** 15.67*** 25.19*** 21.04*** Adjusted R 2.19 .26 .26 .29 Standard errors clustered by cohorts in parentheses. All models control for the different departments, universities and questionnaire versions /C160pB.1; * pB.05; ** pB.01; *** pB.001 (two-tailed test) 17Perceived Ideological Distance and Ideological Position are correlated ( r=- .56) but multicollin- earity does not constitute a problem in this model as the variance inﬂation factor (VIF) of any regressor inthe model is lower than 2.2.498 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 expectation to encounter politically biased behaviors in class. Finally, the partial refusal cohort dummy is positive and statistically signiﬁcant, which indicates that inthose cohorts for whom partial refusals were obtained, the level of perceived political bias is slightly higher. In an additional analysis we assessed the effect of selection on the estimated relationship between perceived ideological distance andperceived political bias by adding an interaction term of perceived ideologicaldistance 9partial refusal cohort to Model 2. The coefﬁcient of this interaction term is small ( b=- .007) and statistically insigniﬁcant ( p=.66), suggesting no indication for selection bias. In Model 3 we test Hypothesis 2, expecting the effect of perceived ideological distance to be moderated by the student’s interest in politics. Results indicate that, indeed, the interaction term of perceived ideological distance and Political Interest is positive but it only borders on statistical signiﬁcance ( p=.102). Thus, the perceived ideological distance effect is somewhat ampliﬁed when the student is interested inpolitics, but this ﬁnding is not statistically signiﬁcant at the conventional threshold. Assessing Reverse CausalityWhile we hypothesize that perceived ideological distance between a student and her professors increases perceived political bias, one might argue that the reverse causal relationship is also possible: a student’s perception that her professors are biasedmight result in the student assigning them political positions further away from herown, perhaps as to distance herself from those professors. 18In order to assess the possibility of reverse causality we employed instrumental variable estimation(reported in detail in Sect. 3 of the Online Resource). Our questionnaire had fourversions, each with a different order of three sets of questions, 19in order to attain estimates of perceived political bias that are robust to question order. For the purpose of this analysis we are interested in the effect of a particular question order, namely, the effect of prompting students to report their fear to express politicalopinions, prior to reporting perceived political bias. We expected these two versionsof the questionnaire to prime the students’ awareness of fear to express opinions inclass, and thus impact their reported levels of perceived political bias. Importantly,the four versions were randomly assigned to the students, and a set of randomizationchecks conﬁrmed that the four groups were adequately balanced. 20 Our results indeed indicate that the perceived political bias score following questions about students’ fear to express opinions was signiﬁcantly higher ( M=.29, SD=.16) than in the reversed order ( M=.24, SD=.17) ( t(560) =3.32, p=.001). This ‘fear priming’ effect offers an instrumental variable to assess the (reversed) causal effect of perceived political bias on perceived political distance. Wecreated a dummy variable, fear prime , with the value of 1 where perceived political 18On this possible ‘‘projection’ ’ problem, see Malhotra and Jessee ( 2013 ). 19One tapping perceived political bias; another set tapping students’ fear to express political opinions in their professors’ presence; and a set of questions about students’ evaluations of their professors. Questionorder in the four versions is detailed in Sect. 2 of the Online Resource. 20Details on the randomization checks are available in Sect. 2 of the Online Resource.Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 499 123 bias items followed questions about students’ fear to express opinions, and 0 otherwise. Since the four versions of the questionnaire were randomly assigned, thisvariable is unrelated to unmeasured causes of the dependent variable. Moreover, items measuring perceived ideological distance are located after both sets of items gauging fear to express opinions and perceived political bias in all the questionnaire versions;thus our instrumental variable (Fear Prime) is not expected to have a direct effect onperceived ideological distance. These criteria satisfy the preliminary conditions forinstrumental variable estimation (Sovey and Green 2011 ). Next we ran a two-stage least squares (2SLS) regression using Fear Prime as an instrument for perceived political bias. 21The ﬁrst stage equation indicates that Fear Prime has a signiﬁcant positive effect on perceived political bias ( t=4.16, p\.001), and is sufﬁciently strong ( F(1, 30) =16.76, p\.001) (Sovey and Green 2011 , p. 190). Instrumenting for perceived political bias in the second equation resulted in an insigniﬁcant coefﬁcient ( p=.3). This result indicates no causal effect of perceived political bias on perceived ideological distance. This null result allowsus to reject the possibility of reversed causality in our data, and lends further supportfor Hypothesis 1. The Direction of Perceived Ideological Distance After establishing that perceived ideological distance is a strong predictor of perceptions of political bias, a more nuanced question is whether this effect of the ideologicaldistance is symmetric . In other words, does an ideological distance to the left (when a student’s ideological position is to the right of her professors) yield the sameconsequences for perceived political bias as an equal ideological distance to the right(when a student’s ideological position is to the left of her professors)? For this purposewe divided our sample into two groups: students who perceived their professors to be overall more left-leaning than themselves (henceforth ‘‘left-gap’ ’ group; N=367); and students who perceived their overall professors’ ideological average position to besimilar or more right-leaning than themselves (‘ ‘right-gap’’ group; N=163). 22 Overall, professors in our sample were mostly seen as leftists, as the mean ideological position of professors was 5.4 on a 1–7 right-left scale ( SD=1.3). This is consistent with typical portrayals of Israeli university professors (e.g., Shamir 2012 ). Note, however, that the left-gap group consists not only of right-wing students:Students from the political center compose 20 %, and another 25 % are leftist students. In the right-gap group 85 % of students are indeed from the political left. In order to gauge the effect of perceived ideological distance on perceived political bias in these groups, we added both a dummy variable for the right-gapgroup ( right -gap) and an interaction term between right-gap and perceived ideological distance to Model 4. As can be seen, this interaction term is negativeand statistically signiﬁcant, suggesting that the difference between the effects of 21The detailed analysis is provided in Sect. 3 of the Online Resource. 22There were 51 students who perceived their overall professors’ ideological average position to be identical to their own ideological position. Omitting them from the right-gap group did not affect theresult of the interaction term between Right-Gap and Perceived Ideological Distance in Model 4.500 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 perceived ideological distance on perceived political bias under right-gap and left- gap conditions is statistically signiﬁcant. The coefﬁcient for the association betweenperceived ideological distance and perceived political bias in the left-gap group is b=.078 ( p\.001), while this coefﬁcient in the right-gap group is b=- .028 (ns). This ﬁnding suggests that perceived ideological distance’s effect on perceivedpolitical bias is asymmetric, and, to a certain degree, challenges the generality ofour ﬁrst hypothesis. In other words, it is mostly students in the left-gap group (whoare not just right-wing students) who exhibit a ‘‘relative bias’’ (Stanig 2013 , p. 732) in evaluating the extent of their professors’ political bias. In the discussion belowwe provide a possible explanation for these results. Robustness Tests Overall, the results so far are in line with our ﬁrst research hypothesis; for most students, perceived ideological distance between themselves and their professorscauses higher perceived political bias. Results hold when we control for otherpossible predictors of our dependent variable, but we nevertheless conducted aseries of robustness tests in order to investigate whether the results are robust tovariations in model speciﬁcations, measurements, and model estimations. 23 First, we treated Model 2 in Table 1as our baseline model and re-ran it, each time separately adding to the model one of the following variables: self-reported gradeaverage; self-reported level of class participation; dummy variables for second-yearand third-year students; dummy variables for non-Jewish students and for non-Hebrewnative speakers; students’ ideological strength; and the number of students in class.Adding any of these variables did not signiﬁcantly change the results of the baselinemodel. Additional robustness tests address the potential competing explanations thatour ﬁndings are due to the mean professors’ (perceived) ideological position or due to perceptions of these professors as ideologically radicals (rather than ideologically distant). 24Further models were ﬁtted to gauge the sensitivity of our ﬁndings to variations in the measure of perceived political bias, and for examining our baselinemodel separately on each of the seven perceived political bias items. Overall, theseadditional tests conﬁrm our main ﬁnding that perceived ideological distance between astudent and her professor’s results in higher levels of perceived political bias. Discussion Despite the many accusations of political bias aimed at academy professors, news reporters, judges and others, only a few studies have examined the effect ofperceived ideological distance on perceptions of political bias (Gunther et al. 2001 ; Turner 2007 ; Feldman 2011 ). These studies focused only on perceived political bias in media coverage of speciﬁc issues or speciﬁc news channels, rather than on a moregeneral perception of political bias regarding an agent or institution. In this study we examined the hypothesis that perceived ideological distance shapes overall 23Full results are available in Sect. 4 of the Online Resource. 24We thank two of the reviewers for suggesting these possibilities.Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 501 123 perceptions of political bias in the context of higher education, by inquiring whether a perceived ideological distance between a student and her set of professorsincreases her perception that her professors are politically biased. The empirical results support this hypothesis. Drawing on a survey of students from social sciences and law faculties in ﬁve Israeli universities, our results show thatthe perceived ideological distance between a student and her set of professorssubstantially increases perceived political bias. Overall, the ﬁnding that perceivedideological distance is the most dominant predictor of perceived political bias isimportant with regard to several theoretical frameworks and research agendas. First,this ﬁnding is congruent with studies on perceptions of bias which show that thejudgment of bias in others is, to a certain degree, in itself biased (e.g., Gunther 1992 ; Feldman 2011 ). A student’s ideological disagreement with her professors was found to affect her judgment of her professors’ behavior, although this factor is prima facieirrelevant to this judgment. Second, this study’s ﬁndings emphasize the importance ofstudying subjective perceptions (see also Ross and Ward 1996 ; Bartels and Johnson 2013 ), as our measure of perceived ideological distance helps us understand students’ comprehension and evaluation of their professors’ behavior in class. But perhaps most importantly, this ﬁnding supports the notion that attributions of bias are ‘‘born in perceptions of disagreement’’ (Pronin et al. 2004 , p. 789); that is, people tend to perceive others with whom they disagree, especially on issues involving ideological matters and core values, as more biased (Ross and Ward 1996 ; Pronin et al. 2004 ; Kennedy and Pronin 2008 ; Feldman 2011 ). Accordingly, our results attest to the strong effect of perceived ideological distance, a factor that thusfar has been mostly absent in the study of perceptions of political bias in manyinstitutions. Future research aimed at explaining perceived political bias couldsubstantiate our results—in the academy and perhaps also in other institutions. A number of scholars have recently suggested that perceived political bias in the academic context is the result of certain attributes of students (Fisler and Foubert 2006 ; Linvill 2011 ). The ﬁndings of this study suggest that the experience of political bias could be the result of an interaction between both psychological and dispositionalfactors, and situational factors. On the one hand, the effect of perceived ideologicaldistance on perceived political bias was found to overshadow those of a considerableset of individual-level attributes, including ideological position and political interest,which could suggest that the role of situational factors in shaping perceived politicalbias in the classroom is at least as important as dispositional factors. This conclusion conforms with ﬁndings that perceptions of media bias are more affected by situational or relational factors than by dispositional ones (Gunther 1992 ). Moreover, our ﬁndings suggest that perceived ideological distance tends to bias perceptions of political bias only when the student perceives her professors’ viewsas more left leaning than her own. 25Our point of departure for a tentative explanation for this asymmetric effect of ideological distance is the dominance ofleft ideological views among academic professors (e.g., Gross and Fosse 2012 ). Under such dominance one can expect that professors’ expression of views that are 25Note that this asymmetry does not refer to the difference between right-wing and left-wing students , but rather between students who are exposed to views to the right of their positions, or to the left.502 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 left of the evaluating student’s ideological position carries an additional load of reﬂecting the left-wing dominance, beyond its informative message, whichprofessors’ expression of views to the right of the student’s position do not hold. Experiencing such relatively left-wing views is therefore expected to elicit greater motivation to rebut the message by portraying it as biased, compared with relativelyright-wing views. This possible interpretation draws on studies of racial relations in racially-mixed schools which suggest that black students in such environments are less receptive tocritical feedback from their white teachers, as critical feedback is threatening tothese students, raising the prospect that they have been judged in light of a negativestereotype (Cohen et al. 1999 , p. 1302; Cohen 2012 , p. 396). This possible explanation for the asymmetry in the effect of perceived ideological distance on perceived political bias requires additional research in order to assess its potentialvalidity, in the academia as well as in other institutions. Moving from empirical ﬁndings to policy recommendations should always be done carefully, and any policy that ignores the direct and indirect costs ofemploying or avoiding a seemingly inﬂuential measure is likely to be misguided.Policy should rely on comprehensive cost-effectiveness analysis; accordingly, evenif our ﬁndings suggest that the expression of political views by professors may cause some students to experience more political bias, this should not immediately lead us to conclude that expressing such views should be avoided, as such a policy alsocarries costs such as derogating the quality of teaching of some topics, limitingfreedom of speech etc. 26 Having said that, we tentatively suggest that understanding that the experience of political bias is at least partly the result of perceived ideological distance should makeprofessors more aware of the potential consequences of what they say and do in class.Indeed, we believe that the suggestions offered by Fisler and Foubert ( 2006 )f o r dealing with the issue of political bias in class—in particular the engagement of faculty members in self-reﬂection with regard to their behavior in class, 27and the need to strive for transparency, openness and mutual trust between students andprofessors—merit consideration, and could hopefully reduce perceived political bias,or at least mitigate its effects. Such tentative suggestions could also prove beneﬁcialin other domains in which people are accused of being politically biased. On the other hand, some commentators have suggested that ideologically diversifying the academy could help expose students to various ideological positions and different worldviews (e.g., Redding 2001 ). While ideological diversiﬁcation may be a good idea for various reasons (e.g., Haidt 2011 ), our ﬁndings do not support the notion that ideologically diversifying the academy wouldreduce perceived political bias. Further research in other domains could helpconﬁrm whether this conclusion is relevant beyond the academy. This research is not without limitations. Most obviously, we investigated the effect of perceived ideological distance on perceived political bias in only one typeof institution in only one country, and inferring from the results to broader domains 26For a broader discussion, see Smith et al. ( 2008 , chapter 8). See also Hickey and Brecher ( 1990 ). 27Albeit correction of mental biases is for the most part an effortful process (Wilson and Brekke 1994 ).Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 503 123 should be done carefully. Additionally, some deviations from a perfectly representative sample leave some doubts regarding external validity of our ﬁndings.Notwithstanding these concerns, we believe that the demonstrated robustness of our results provide sufﬁcient evidence to support our main conclusion, that perceived ideological distance inﬂuences students’ perceptions of political bias. Acknowledgments This research was supported by a generous grant from the Max Kampelman Chair for Democracy and Human Rights. We thank Roey Reichert, who worked with the ﬁrst author on apreliminary study preceding this project. We also wish to thank Pazit Ben-nun Bloom, Chanan Cohen,Avner de-Shalit, Anat Gofen, Liat Raz-Yurovich, Ilana Ritov, Tamir Sheafer, Mario Sznajder, GadiWolfsfeld, the editors of Political Behavior , four anonymous reviewers, members of the Cognition and Policy Research Group at the Federmann School of Public Policy and Government at the HebrewUniversity, members of the Politika Forum at the Hebrew University, and participants at the annualmeetings of the Israeli Political Science Association and the International Society of Political Psychology. Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they had no conﬂicts of interest with respect to their authorship or the publication of this article. Ethical standards The authors declare that this study complied with the current laws of the country in which it was performed. Appendix 1: The Wording of the Seven Perceived Political Bias Questions In your opinion, to what extent have the following statements been true about your studies this year in the Political Science Department ? (1—Not at all; 2—To a small extent; 3—To a certain extent; 4—To a great extent; 5—To a very great extent) 1) Lecturers presented the learning material neutrally, appropriately relating to various political positions relating to the materials studied (reversed coded). 2) Lecturers expressed their personal political opinions on various political issues during the lessons. 3) As a course requirement, lecturers demanded reading of materials which presented only one political position. 4) Lecturers tried to convince students in classes they were teaching that a certain political position was more correct. 5) Lecturers were unwilling to hear political opinions which did not match their own. To what extent do you agree with the following statements? (1—Deﬁnitely do not agree; 2—Do not agree; 3—Neutral; 4—Agree; 5—Deﬁnitely agree) 6) The lecturers with whom I studied in the Political Science Department tend to underestimate students who express different political attitudes than theirs during the lesson, in a paper or on a test. 7) The lecturers with whom I studied this year in the Political Science Department give lower marks to students who express different political attitudes than theirsduring the lesson, in a paper or on a test.504 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 References Achen, C. H. (1978). Measuring representation. American Journal of Political Science ,22(3), 475–510. American Council of Trustees and Alumni (ACTA). (2005). Intellectual diversity: Time for action . Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http://www.goacta.org/images/download/intellectual_diversity.pdf . Bar, T., & Zussman, A. (2012). Partisan grading. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4 (1), 30–48. Bargsted, M. A., & Kedar, O. (2009). Coalition-targeted Duvergerian voting: How expectations affect voter choice under proportional representation. American Journal of Political Science, 53 (2), 307–323. Bartels, B. L., & Johnson, C. D. (2013). On the ideological foundations of Supreme Court legitimacy in the American public. American Journal of Political Science, 57 (1), 184–199. Bauerlein, M. (2004). Liberal groupthink is anti-intellectual. Chronicle of Higher Education , November 12. Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http://chronicle.com/weekly/v51/i12/12b00601.htm . Benoit, K., & Laver, M. (2006). Party policy in modern democracies . New York: Routledge. Cohen, G. L. (2003). Party over policy: The dominating impact of group inﬂuence on political beliefs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85 (5), 808–822. Cohen, G. L. (2012). Identity, belief, and bias. In J. Hansin (Ed.), Ideology, psychology, and law (pp. 385–403). New York: Oxford University Press. Cohen, G. L., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The mentors’ dilemma: Providing critical feedback across the racial divide. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25 (10), 1302–1318. D’Alessio, D., & Allen, M. (2000). Media bias in presidential elections: A meta-analysis. Journal of Communication, 50 , 133–156. Detroit Local. (2012). Santorum blasts Penn State, says grades were docked for beliefs , February 28. Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http://detroit.cbslocal.com/2012/02/28/santorum-tells-charlie-langton- his-college-grades-were-docked-for-his-beliefs/ . Dixon, J. C., & McCabe, J. (2006). Competing perspectives in the classroom: The effect of sociology students’ perceptions of ‘‘balance’’ on evaluations. Teaching Sociology, 34 , 111–125. Eagly, A. H., Kulesa, P., Brannon, L. A., Shaw, K., & Hutson-Comeaux, S. (2000). Why counterattitudinal messages are as memorable as proattitudinal messages: The importance of active defense against attack. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26 , 1392–1408. Eveland, W. P, Jr, & Shah, D. (2003). The impact of individual and interpersonal factors on perceived news media bias. Political Psychology, 24 (1), 101–117. Feldman, L. (2011). Partisan differences in opinionated news perceptions: A test of the hostile media effect. Political Behavior, 33 , 407–432. Fisler, J., & Foubert, J. A. (2006). Teach me, but don’t disagree with me. About Campus, 11 (5), 2–8. Frantz, C. M. (2006). I AM being fair: The bias blind spot as a stumbling block to seeing both sides. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 28 , 157–167. Gazal-Ayal, O., & Sulitzeanu-Kenan, R. (2010). Let my people go: Ethnic in-group bias in judicial decisions—Evidence from a randomized natural experiment. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 7(3), 403–428. Giner-Sorolla, R., & Chaiken, S. (1994). The cause of hostile media judgments. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 30 , 165–180. Gross, N., & Fosse, E. (2012). Why are professors liberal? Theory and Society, 41 , 127–168. Gross, N., & Simmons, S. (2006). American’s views of political bias in the academy and academic freedom . Working paper. Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http://www.aaup.org/NR/rdonlyres/ DCF3EBD7-509E-47AB-9AB3-FBCFFF5CA9C3/0/2006Gross.pdf . Gunther, A. C. (1992). Biased press or biased public? Attitudes toward media coverage of social groups. Public Opinion Quarterly, 56 , 147–167. Gunther, A. C., Christen, C. T., Liebhart, J. L., & Chih, S. C.-Y. (2001). Congenial public, contrary press, and biased estimates of the climate of opinion. Public Opinion Quarterly, 65 , 295–320. Gur, A. (2010). The media and the Oslo process . Tel-Aviv: Oﬁr Bikurim. (in Hebrew). Haidt, J. (2011). The bright future of post -partisan social psychology . Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http:// www.edge.org/3rd_culture/haidt11/haidt11_index.html . Halutz, D. (2012). Juggling act , March 1. Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http://www.haaretz.com/ weekend/magazine/juggling-act-1.415769 . Hickey, T., & Brecher, B. (1990). In defence of bias. Studies in Higher Education, 15 (3), 299–312.Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 505 123 Horowitz, D. (2006). The professors: The 101 most dangerous academics in America . Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing. Im Tirzu. (2011). Politicization at Ben -Gurion University . Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http://www.imti. org.il/Docs/P175/?ThisPageID=1278 . Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics. (2013). Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http://www1.cbs.gov.il/reader/ cw_usr_view_Folder?ID=141 . Jost, J. T., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A. W., & Sulloway, F. J. (2003). Political conservatism as motivated social cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 129 (3), 339–375. Kashti, O. (2009). Tel Aviv students afraid to challenge leftist professors , November 9. Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http://www.haaretz.com/print-edition/news/tel-aviv-students-afraid-to-challenge-leftist- professors-1.4537 . Kelly-Woessner, A., & Woessner, M. (2006). My professor is a partisan hack: How perceptions of a professor’s political views affect student course evaluations. Political Science and Politics, 39 (3), 495–501. Kelly-Woessner, A., & Woessner, M. (2008). Conﬂict in the classroom: Considering the effects of partisan difference on political education. Journal of Political Science Education, 4 (3), 265–285. Kennedy, K. A., & Pronin, E. (2008). When disagreement gets ugly: Perceptions of bias and the escalation of conﬂict. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34 (6), 833–848. Lapinski, M. K., & Boster, F. J. (2001). Modeling the ego-defensive function of attitudes. Communication Monographs, 68 (3), 314–324. Lee, T.-T. (2005). The liberal media myth revisited: An examination of factors inﬂuencing perceptions of media bias. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 49 (1), 43–64. Linvill, D. L. (2011). The relationship between student identity development and the perception of political bias in the college classroom. College Teaching, 59 , 49–55. Linvill, D. L., & Havice, P. A. (2011). Political bias on campus: Understanding the student experience. Journal of College Student Development, 52 (4), 487–496. Linvill, D. L., & Mazer, J. P. (2013). The role of student aggressive communication traits in the perception of instructor ideological bias in the classroom. Communication Education, 62 (1), 48–60. Lis, Y. (2011). Chair of the Knesset Committee Yariv Levin: The Supreme Court endangers our ability to exist, October 1. Retrieved April 2, 2014 from http://www.haaretz.co.il/news/law/1.15158 (in Hebrew). Long, J. S. (1997). Regression models for categorical and limited dependent variables . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Lord, C. G., Ross, R., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased assimilation and attitude polarization: The effects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37 (11), 2098–2109. Losco, J., & Deollos, I. (2007). Fear and loathing in the college classroom: A survey of political science department chairs regarding political bias. Journal of Political Science Education, 3 , 251–264. Machina, K. (1987). Evaluating student evaluation. Academe, 73 (3), 19–22. Malhotra, N., & Jessee, S. A. (2013). Ideological proximity and support for The Supreme Court. Political Behavior . doi: 10.1007/s11109-013-9257-x . Nir, L. (2011). Motivated reasoning and public opinion perception. Public Opinion Quarterly, 75 (3), 504–532. Oppenheimer, D. M., Meyvis, T., & Davidenko, M. (2009). Instructional manipulation checks: Detecting satisﬁcing to increase statistical power. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45 , 867–872. Pronin, E., Gilovich, T., & Ross, L. (2004). Objectivity in the eye of the beholder: Divergent perceptions of bias in self versus others. Psychological Review, 111 (3), 781–799. Redding, R. E. (2001). Sociopolitical diversity in psychology: The case for pluralism. American Psychologist, 56 (3), 205–215. Reeder, G. D., Pryor, J. B., Wohl, M. J. A., & Griswell, M. L. (2005). On attributing negative motives to others who disagree with our opinions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31 , 1498–1510. Robinson, R. J., Keltner, D., Ward, A., & Ross, L. (1995). Actual versus assumed differences in construal: ‘‘Naive realism’’ in intergroup perception and conﬂict. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68 (3), 404–417. Ross, L., & Ward, A. (1996). Naı ¨ve realism in everyday life: Implications for social conﬂict and misunderstandings. In E. S. Reed, E. Turiel, & T. Brown (Eds.), Values and knowledge (pp. 103–135). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.506 Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 123 Shamir, N. (2012). Under the auspice of ‘academic freedom’ the politicization in universities strengthens. New Directions, 26 , 91–106. [In Hebrew]. Smith, B. L. R., Mayer, J. D., & Fritschler, A. L. (2008). Closed minds? Politics and ideology in American universities . Washington, DC: Brooking Institution Press. Sovey, A. J., & Green, D. P. (2011). Instrumental variable estimation in political science: A readers’ guide. American Journal of Political Science, 55 (1), 188–200. Stanig, P. (2013). Political polarization in retrospective economic evaluations during recessions and recoveries. Electoral Studies, 32 (4), 729–745. Sulitzeanu-Kenan, R. (2006). If they get it right: An experimental test of the effects of the appointment and reports of UK public inquiries. Public Administration, 84 (3), 623–653. Sulitzeanu-Kenan, R., & Halperin, E. (2013). Making a difference: Political efﬁcacy and policy preference construction. British Journal of Political Science, 43 (2), 295–322. Taber, C. S., & Lodge, M. (2006). Motivated skepticism in the evaluation of political beliefs. American Journal of Political Science, 50 (3), 755–769. Tollini, C. (2009). The behaviors that college students classify as political bias: Preliminary ﬁndings and implications. Teaching Sociology, 37 (4), 379–389. Tollini, C. (2010). A comparison of faculty members’ and students’ deﬁnitions of political bias in the classroom. International Journal of Sociology and Anthropology, 2 (5), 77–81. Tsfati, Y., & Cohen, J. (2005). Democratic consequences of hostile media perceptions: The case of Gaza settlers. The Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics, 10 (4), 28–51. Turner, J. (2007). The messenger overwhelming the message: Ideological cues and perceptions of bias in television news. Political Behavior, 29 , 441–464. Vallone, R. P., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. T. (1985). The hostile media phenomenon: Biased perception and perception of media bias in coverage of the Beirut Massacre. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49 (3), 577–585. Watts, M. D., Domke, D., Shah, D., & Fan, D. P. (1999). Elite cues and media bias in presidential campaigns. Communication Research, 26 (2), 144–175. Wilson, T. D., & Brekke, N. (1994). Mental contamination and mental correction: Unwanted inﬂuences in judgments and evaluations. Psychological Bulletin, 116 (1), 117–142.Polit Behav (2015) 37:487–507 507 123