 See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/233357149 Electoral Authoritarianism and the Print Media in Mala ysia: Measu ring Political Bias and Analyzing Its Cause Article    in  Asian A ffairs An Americ an R eview · Februar y 2011 DOI: 10.1080/00927678.2010.520575 CITATIONS 47READS 8,178 1 author: Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects: Social media and politic al particip ation (including in SE Asia)  View pr oject Jason P . Abbott Univ ersity of L ouisville 50 PUBLICA TIONS    913 CITATIONS     SEE PROFILE All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Jason P . Abbott  on 30 Januar y 2015. The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file. Asian Affairs: An American Review , 38:1–38, 2011 Copyright C/circlecopyrt2011 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC ISSN: 0092-7678 printDOI: 10.1080/00927678.2010.520575 Electoral Authoritarianism and the Print Media in Malaysia: Measuring Political Bias and Analyzing Its Cause JASON P. ABBOTT Abstract: Studies of electoral authoritarianism in Southeast Asia highlight the signiﬁcance of a compliant media in acting as an obstacle to democratization.Analyses of Malaysian politics are no different. Although the media in Malaysia is largely private, most observers point to the various legislative mechanisms and ownership structures through which compliance is ensured. Although mostpolitical scientists have concluded that such mechanisms ensure there is a progov- ernment bias, there have been few attempts to measure this bias and analyze its impact. With this study, the author aims to begin to ﬁll that gap by studying the degree to which newspapers in Malaysia display partisanship in their coverage of Malaysian politics. To do so, two Malay-language newspapers were selected forcoding, using two separate two-week periods as samples. The ﬁrst period coin- cided with the March 2008 Malaysian general election, and the second, serving as a control, was from October 2006. Having demonstrated a clear degree of progov-ernment bias in both newspapers, the author then explores the factors postulated to explain this. Keywords: elections, electoral authoritarianism, Malaysia, newspapers, political bias Address correspondence to Jason P . Abbott, Department of Political Science, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA. E-mail: jason.abbott@louisville.edu 1 2 Asian Affairs: An American Review Studies of electoral authoritarianism in Southeast Asia1regularly highlight the signiﬁcance of a compliant, if not state-controlled, media in acting as an obstacle to democratization. Analyses of Malaysian politics are no different, and although the media in Malaysia is now largely private, most observers2point to the various legislative mechanisms the government can and does deploy to ensure the media remains compliant, as well as to the ownership structures of the mediacorporations that invariably tie them into complex webs of personal and party power. 3Although political scientists have almost universally concluded that such mechanisms ensure that there is a progovernment bias in the media, there havebeen remarkably few attempts to actually measure this bias quantitatively and to analyze the effect or impact that it has. The only studies of any note were two carried out by the Malaysian political scientist Wong Kok Keong of the 1999 and2004 elections for the civil rights nongovernmental organization Aliran . 4To the best of my knowledge, none of these has been published in any academic journals. Wong Kok Keong’s 1999 survey analyzed the three main English-language print newspapers: the New Straits Times ,t h e Star, and the Sunover seventeen days (November 12–29). The survey coded news reports, opinion pieces, and letters to the editor either positive or negative for the government, positive or negative for theopposition, or non–party related. No information was presented on the number of items coded for the ﬁrst of these, while the sample sizes of the other two categories were very small. 5In addition, there was no calculation of mean or correlation, nor was there a control period.6The 2004 piece similarly coded the same three papers over the period of March 14–21. This time, pictures and “front-page news items” were added as additional variables, and the ﬁve categories were coded for focus (government/opposition), positive or negative for the government and opposition, nonparty, or balanced.7Again, the results did not measure a degree of bias (as the scale did not allow for this); the results were calculated in simple percentages only and, with the exception of the news items and pictures, the letters and opinion pieces were again a very small sample size.8Once more, there was no control period against which to compare the sample. In contrast, the 2008 study by the Centre of Independent Journalism attempted a more scientiﬁc quantitative analysis. In this report, items were coded for sixnewspapers (two Malay, two English-language, and two Tamil) as either 1 (pro- government), –1 (pro-opposition), or 0 (neutral) by volunteers. In addition, physi- cal measurements of space were made for news stories, columns, editorial, letters,and photo montages. In total, almost 4,000 items were coded for the period of the campaign (February 25–March 8). While a more robust survey, the authors themselves noted several problems with their methods, speciﬁcally the inabilityto adequately measure the slant of stories, 9the categorization used in the cod- ing,10and “the absence of data from Chinese-language dailies.”11Furthermore, as with the 1999 and 2004 studies by Wong Kok Keong, there again was no control Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 3 period against which to compare results. Consequently, given the dearth of re- search into government bias, this study aims to address this by providing a more robust quantitative analysis of the print media. The research project on which this article is a preliminary report therefore has selected six representative newspapers to code for political bias—two Malay, two Chinese-language, and two English-language newspapers. To analyze the degree of political partisanship, and the effect that this has, two separate month-long periods were selected and coded for a range of variables. The ﬁrst period coincides with the Malaysian general election of March 2008, and the second, as a control, was from the same date period in 2006, representing a midpoint in theMalaysian electoral cycle. This article presents a review of the ﬁrst two newspapers for which data has been collected, coded, and analyzed: the Malay-language newspapers Utusan Malaysia andBerita Harian . The coding and collation of the data was conducted by two native Malay speakers, one Singaporean, and one Malaysian. To address questions about how objective any assessment for bias can be, the decision wastaken not to employ researchers from Malaysia only. Both researchers followed a detailed codebook and coding instructions modelled on one created by the Comparative National Elections Project 12for the study of newspaper content analysis in the1992 U.S. presidential election. The ﬁndings presented in this article present a preliminary review of the full data that will eventually be collected. In addition, while the ﬁrst part of the article explores the degree of bias found in the data, the second part examines the different explanations that can be proffered to explain this bias. The Print Media in Malaysia: Daily Newspapers Malaysia is a multiethnic country of approximately 28 million people that has, since independence, been dominated politically by a coalition government led by representatives of the country’s majority Malay Muslim population. Although aclear majority in west Malaysia, across the country as a whole, Malays constitute approximately 54–60 percent of the country’s population. 13Among the country’s ethnic minorities, the Chinese community is the single largest group constitutinga little less than a quarter of the population. Historically, the economic dynamism of the Chinese minority has meant that they have contributed a disproportionate share of national output and have been key partners in the coalition government that has held power in Malaysia since 1957. The third-largest ethnic minority in Malaysia is the country’s Indian population (largely Tamil-speaking), whoconstitute approximately 7 percent of the overall population. In terms of circulation, the largest newspapers in Malaysia reﬂect this ethnic division and are drawn from the majority Malay population, the Chinese minority, 4 Asian Affairs: An American Review TABLE 1. Major Newspapers in Malaysia by Language Language Publication Bahasa Melayu Harian Metro Berita HarianUtusan MalaysiaKosmo Chinese Sin Chew Daily China Press Guang Ming Daily Nanyang English Star New Straits TimesSunMalay Mail Tamil Nanban as well as a thriving English-language print media, hence the rationale for the selection of the newspaper sampled. According to a 2008 Neilsen Media report, the overall daily readership of newspapers in Malaysia stands at 7.5 million,approximately 54 percent of the population aged over ﬁfteen years. 14The print media is dominated by twelve or thirteen national daily newspapers, four of which are published in Malay, a further four in Chinese,15four in English and one in Tamil.16These are listed in table 1. As table 2 illustrates, Bahasa Melayu dailies dominate the market, although the English language Star and Chinese Sin Chew Daily have signiﬁcant readerships. For the overall research project, six newspapers were selected: Berita Harian , Utusan Malaysia ,Sin Chew Daily ,China Press ,t h e Star, and the New Straits Times . This article, however, focuses on only data collected for the ﬁrst two of these, Berita Harian andUtusan Malaysia . Berita Harian andUtusan Malaysia Berita Harian (Daily News ) was, until 2005, the leading Malay-language news- paper in Malaysia. Founded on the same day as Malaysia gained its independencein 1957, the newspaper initially was part of the Singaporean Straits Times Group, which eventually transferred its Kuala-Lumpur-based operations together with its related assets and liabilities to a wholly owned subsidiary, the New Straits TimesPress (Malaysia) Bhd (NSTP) in 1972. On October 14, the Fleet Group Sdn Bhd Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 5 TABLE 2. Major Newspapers in Malaysia by Readership Newspaper Approximate % of readership Harian Metro 15 Berita Harian 8 The Star 8 Sin Chew Daily 8 Utusan Malaysia 7 China Press 5 Kosmo 3 New Straits Times 2 The Sun 2 Guang Ming Daily 2 Nanyang 2 Nanban <2 Malay Mail <1 Source: Nielsen Media, “Mainstream Media Continues to Lead Malaysia’s Media Scene, Internet Penetretion Denbles in Five Years,” October 23, 2008, http//my.nielsen.com/news/20081023.shtml (accessed November 20, 2009). took over the operations of NSTP until 1990, when the Renong holding com- pany bought out NSTP from Fleet Group Sdn Bhd, resulting in several corporate changes. In 1993, following a management buy-out, NTSP was eventually taken over by a third holding company, Malaysia Resources Corporation Berhad, which retained control of the newspaper company until 2001, when the corporation’smedia subsidiaries were divested under a company that would eventually be- come the media conglomerate Media Prima (subsequently discussed). Through- out this period, although in private hands, the NTSP and Berita Harian have been linked to the United Malays National Organization (UMNO)—the dominant party in the governing National Front coalition that has governed Malaysia since independence—by close personal connections and share ownership in the variousdifferent holding companies. 17 Utusan Malaysia (the Malaysia Courier ) was founded in 1939 as Utusan Melayu as a vehicle for Malays to express their opinion on British colonial rule. Originally published in Singapore, the newspaper moved to Kuala Lumpur in 1958 following Malaysian independence. Before 2004, the newspaper vied with Berita Harian for the title of the country’s leading Malay-language newspaper in terms of circulation and readership. Since 2004, its position has slipped, but the newspaper is of particular interest because its parent company is largely owned by the UnitedMalays National Organization, and it is widely regarded as being both overtly 6 Asian Affairs: An American Review progovernment as well as fervently Malay nationalist. Since the 2008 election, it has attracted widespread criticism from the country’s opposition parties and liberal intelligentsia for allegedly stoking racism with provocative rhetoric, columns and headlines in a country in which racial identity remains the principal societalcleavage. 18Indeed, in response to such racial sentiments, the state government of Perak (under opposition control until February 2009), launched a boycott against the newspaper.19Furthermore, the Democratic Action Party (a constituent member of the Pakatan Rakyat) ﬁled a report against the newspaper, accusing it of stirring up sentiments encouraging violence against one of its MPs, Teresa Kok,20who in turn ﬁled a RM30 million ( $8.8 million) defamation suit against the paper.21 Data Findings Government and Opposition Bias Measurements In total, seventeen variables were coded, of which ﬁve explicitly coded for degrees of bias/partisanship. These were as follows: government bias, oppositionbias, reporter tone, evaluation of actor in article, and evaluation of actor in photo. Government bias and opposition bias were coded on a seven-point Likert scale (1 being extremely critical to 7 being extremely positive), 22the evaluation of the actor in article was coded on a ﬁve-point Likert scale, while reporter tone and the evaluation of an actor in a photograph were measured on a three-point Likert scale. With speciﬁc reference to the bias measurements, the codebook instructed the researchers to code articles from the perspective of the Barisan Nasional and opposition, respectively. For Utusan Malaysia , a total of 515 separate items were coded in the February/March 2008 analysis and 472 items in the period February/March 2006. For Berita Harian , a smaller number of items were coded by the researcher in both data sets, with the 2006 sample signiﬁcantly smaller at121 items against 380 in the 2008 data set. Bias toward the government in both periods was considerable in both news- papers (see tables 3–6). In Utusan Malaysia , a mean of 5.45 for the 2006 period TABLE 3. Bias Measure for Utusan Malaysia , February–March 2008 Bias N Minimum Maximum MS D Government bias 236 1 .00 7 .00 5 .9619 1 .12733 Opposition bias 194 1 .00 7 .00 2 .0670 1 .23869 Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 7 TABLE 4. Bias Measure for Utusan Malaysia , February–March 2006 Bias N Minimum Maximum MS D Government bias 223 2 .00 7 .00 5 .4574 1 .35790 Opposition bias 10 1 .00 7 .00 3 .5000 2 .41523 TABLE 5. Bias Measure for Berita Harian, February–March 2008 Bias N Minimum Maximum MS D Government bias 298 1 .00 7 .00 5 .3523 1 .06995 Opposition bias 265 1 .00 6 .00 2 .5585 1 .05770 TABLE 6. Bias Measure for Berita Harian , February–March 2006 Bias N Minimum Maximum MS D Government bias 115 2.00 6.00 5.1652 1.14655 Opposition bias 9 2.00 5.00 4.0000 1.00000 and 5.96 for the 2008 period were recorded, while in Berita Harian , a mean of 5.1623was recorded for the 2006 period and 5.35 for the 2008 period. Similarly, bias against the opposition was unsurprisingly strong in the run-up to the 2008 election, of where the mean score was 2.06 in Utusan Malaysia and 2.35 in Berita Harian . Furthermore, if we measure the mean government and opposition bias over time (ﬁgures A1–A6 in the appendix) then we can see in both 2008 data sets thatin the week immediately before the election, the mean bias is noticeably more pronounced, particularly in Berita Harian (see ﬁgures A4 and A6). Therefore, in comparing the four data sets, it is possible to conclude that in the two Malay-language newspapers’ bias toward the government and against the opposition did 8 Asian Affairs: An American Review become more pronounced in the run-up to the election compared to the control period. Measuring opposition bias was also instructive in that, for both Utusan Malaysia andBerita Harian , the data sets from 2006 (midway through the election cycle) show that the opposition received barely any coverage at all rendering any measure of bias against the opposition in 2006 statistically insigniﬁcant.24For example, of the 472 items coded in Utusan Malaysia for 2006, only 10 items were coded for opposition bias, representing just 2.1 percent of the total. The results from Berita Harian were almost identical. While the number of items in the survey was much smaller, of the 121 items coded in the 2006 survey, only 9 were coded foropposition bias (less than 7 percent of the total). In contrast, the data sets for 2008, which coded items before and during the election campaign of March 2008, saw a large increase in the number of items coded for opposition bias. Of the 515 itemscoded in Utusan Malaysia , 194 were coded for opposition bias, whereas in Berita Harian , of 380 items, 265 items were coded for opposition bias. From this data, it can be concluded that outside of election periods, opposition political partiesand leaders receive such scant coverage as to be virtually ignored; indeed, one can argue that they are conspicuous by their very absence. When they do receive coverage, it is disproportionately during election periods and is decidedly critical. Correlations in Government and Opposition Bias Correlations were run to compare government bias and opposition bias for the 2008 data sets (tables 7 and 8) only since the Nsize for the items coded for opposition bias in both newspapers in the 2006 data set were so small. With corre-lations of –.644 and –.844 respectively, the correlation is statistically signiﬁcant, TABLE 7. Correlation for Berita Harian 2008 Data Set Variable Government bias Opposition bias Government bias Pearson correlation 1 – .664 Sig. (2-tailed) .000 .000N 298 197 Opposition bias Pearson correlation –.664 ∗∗1 Sig. (2-tailed) .000 .000N 197 265 Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 9 TABLE 8. Correlation for Utusan Malaysia 2008 Data Set Variable Government bias Opposition bias Government bias Pearson correlation 1 – .844∗∗ Sig. (2-tailed) .000 .000 N 236 135 Opposition bias Pearson correlation –.844∗∗1 Sig. (2-tailed) .000 .000N 135 194 revealing quite clearly that the more positively biased both papers became toward the government the more negative was their coverage of the opposition. t-Tests When both data sets were merged and one-way t-tests were run (See tables A2 and A3 in appendix), with the publication as the factor of variance, a signiﬁcanceof .00 was recorded for both government and opposition bias. Consequently, the difference in means between Utusan Malaysia andBerita Harian was statistically signiﬁcant, although one can question the extent to which a difference of +0.6 in the mean for government bias in 2008 and –0.49 for opposition bias is substantively meaningful. Notwithstanding this proviso, in both the 2008 and 2006 periods,Utusan Malaysia was statistically more biased positively toward the government compared with Berita Harian , which was also less critical in its coverage of the opposition in 2008. 25 Reporter Tone The most distinguishing aspect of the data on this variable, from both newspa- pers, is that the overwhelming majority of items were coded as being a “straight description” (see tables 9–12). In the 2006 Utusan Malaysia data set, 62.7 percent of items were coded as being purely descriptive; in the 2008 data set, 72.8 percent. ForBerita Harian , the results were almost identical, with 65.8 percent of items coded as being straight description in the 2006 data set, and 79.3 percent in 2008.As the Malaysian researcher who coded Berita Harian remarked, 10 Asian Affairs: An American Review TABLE 9. Utusan Malaysia February–March 2006 Data Set: Reporter Tone % Cumulative Variable Frequency % valid % Valid Reinforcing comments 83 17 .6 60.6 60.6 Mixed 13 2 .8 9.5 70.1 Deﬂating comments 41 8 .7 29.9 100.0 Total 137 29 .0 100.0 Missing Not applicable 21 4 .4 Straight description 296 62 .7 Can not determine 18 3 .8 Total 335 71 .0 Total 472 100 .0 Variable N Minimum Maximum MS D Reporter tone 137 1.00 3.00 1.6934 .90393 Valid N(listwise) 137 I found that most of the election stories were of a very low quality. The reporters only reported what was said by BN [Barisan Nasional] politicians, even when I thinkthey could have done better by providing some background to make a more positivespin out of it. ...You would also almost never see words like “amid,” “in a move seen as” and others that would put things in context. ... In terms of the items that were coded for reporter tone, the overwhelming majority in all the data sets were coded as reinforcing or reﬂecting positively onthe item or the message of the actor(s) in the item. This lack of critical analysis is a feature that has been noted by several commentators, 26with the result that the “mainstream media is widely perceived as ...sympathetic, if not sycophantic, towards the regime—apologists and eunuchs.”27 Evaluation of Actor and Evaluation of Actor in Photo In terms of individual political candidates and leaders, no one ﬁgure was coded sufﬁciently frequently to ascertain any meaningful statistical signiﬁcances. For example, in the 2008 data set for Berita Harian , while an actor (individual or agency) was coded 315 times out of the 380 items, the largest cumulative total for any one actor was for the then–Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi, who was Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 11 TABLE 10. Utusan Malaysia February–March 2008 Data Set: Reporter Tone % Cumulative Variable Frequency % valid % Valid Reinforcing comments 60 11 .76 7 .46 7 .4 Mixed 6 1 .26 .77 4 .2 Deﬂating comments 23 4 .52 5 .8 100 .0 Total 89 17 .3 100 .0 Missing Not applicable 49 9 .5 Straight description 375 72 .8 Can not determine 2 .4 Total 426 82 .7 Total 515 100 .0 Variable N Minimum Maximum MS D Reporter tone 89 1 .00 3 .00 1 .5843 .87658 Valid N(listwise) 89 coded 47 times (see table A1 in appendix). The largest cumulative total for a named opposition ﬁgure was for Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party (PAS) leader Hadi Awang, who was coded only 11 times (the largest total for the opposition was for “unnamed Pakatan ofﬁcial,” who was coded 22 times). However, the cumulativetotal of government and opposition ﬁgures, indicates that of the 69 times an opposition ﬁgure was coded (named or unnamed), in 62 percent of cases, they were coded critically. Of the 200 items coded for a government ﬁgure (namedor unnamed), 60 percent were coded positive or afﬁrmative. Such results largely mirror those for overall government and opposition bias presented earlier. Statistically, the number of items that were coded for evaluation of actor in photo represented a very small proportion of the total items; for the 2008 Utusan Malaysia data set, just 7.6 percent of all items coded; and for the 2008 Berita Harian data set, 14.2 percent. Given the size of the group, when this variable is coded by individual the Nsize for each actor is too small to draw any statistical relationship. Unsurprisingly, Abdullah Badawi is coded as appearing most fre-quently (37 percent of the time in the 2008 Berita Harian sample). Although one would naturally expect this, as Abdullah was prime minister at the time, it also 12 Asian Affairs: An American Review TABLE 11. Berita Harian February–March 2006 Data Set: Reporter Tone % Cumulative Variable Frequency % valid % Valid Reinforcing comments 25 20 .7 100 .0 100 .0 Missing Not applicable 3 2 .5 Straight description 93 76 .9 Total 96 79 .3 Total 121 100 .0 Variable N Minimum Maximum MS D Reporter tone 25 1 .00 1 .00 1 .0000 .00000 Valid N(listwise) 25 TABLE 12. Berita Harian February–March 2008 Data Set: Reporter Tone % Cumulative Variable Frequency % valid % Valid Reinforcing comments 100 26 .38 8 .58 8 .5 Not applicable 10 2 .68 .89 7 .3 Straight description 3 .82 .7 100 .0 Total 113 29 .7 100 .0 Missing Reinforcing comments 17 4 .5 Not applicable 250 65 .8 Straight description 267 70 .3 Total 380 100 .0 Variable N Minimum Maximum MS D Reporter tone 113 1 .00 3 .00 1 .1416 .41976 Valid N(listwise) 113 Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 13 reﬂects a conspicuous habit among the mainstream media of attributing events and initiatives to the prime minister. The only other notable frequencies recorded for the then–Deputy Prime Minis- ter Najib Tun Razak and in Utusan Malaysia for the then–Minister of Education, Hishammudin Hussein.28In all cases, none of the actors were coded negatively. In terms of the opposition, of the 146 photos that were coded for this variable, only 2 photos were coded for opposition ﬁgures—a striking omission. In this light, despitethe lack of statistical signiﬁcances for this variable, the comments of the Malaysian researcher who carried out the coding of Berita Harian are very insightful, I also noticed that at election time, BH[Berita Harian ] made sure photos of the prime minister and deputy prime minister were published on the ﬁrst few pages. Butthey would also make sure that photos of opposition leaders were notpublished. I am sure this was to make sure their readers would not see any opposition faces. ... Also they would not publish many photos of the prime minister and his deputy whenthe stories were bad for the government, as seen during the last day of February 29 and the ﬁrst few days of March 2006, when the price of petrol went up by 30 sen.30 [My emphasis. ] Explaining the Prevalance of Progovernment Bias How does this article account for the progovernment bias? Generally one can proffer three principal explanations for this: legislative checks on freedom of the press; structural or institutional constraints; and cultural or environmental con- straints. This project is speciﬁcally interested in identifying, coding, and analyzingthe ﬁnal one of these explanations, because this explanation has to date received the least attention. 31At this stage in the project, however, the analysis of cultural and environmental constraints is more speculative as the research on this has yetto be concluded. Addressing this in the interim, this article has used publically available data on socioeconomic, cultural, and political values to make some pre- liminary observations. The bulk of the analysis of the ﬁrst two explanations is drawn from existing studies of Malaysian politics and society. Legislative Checks and the Nature of the Political Regime in Malaysia Among the principal legislative checks on freedom of the press and freedom of expression are amendments to the Federal Constitution, the Internal Security Act, the Ofﬁcial Secrets Act, the Sedition Act, and the Printing Presses and Publications Act. Although freedom of speech is enshrined in article 10(1) of theFederal Constitution, section 2 of article 10 provides restrictions on that freedom when “necessary or expedient in the interest of the security of the Federation,” to maintain “friendly relations with other countries, public order or morality” andrestrictions designed “to protect the privileges of parliament or of any Legislative 14 Asian Affairs: An American Review Assembly or to provide against contempt of court, defamation, or incitement to violence.”32In addition, following the race riots in May 1969, a further amendment was introduced to article 10 in March 1971 that allows parliament to pass laws that prohibit “the questioning of any matter, right, status, position, privilege, sovereignty or prerogative”33established in articles 152 and 153 of the constitution, which were introduced to constitutionally enshrine and protect the privileged position of the Malay community and the special rights and quotas containedwithin these articles. 34 Of all of the means by which the government is able to silence critical voices, the Internal Security Act (ISA) attracts the most opprobrium. Originally passedin 1960 at the end of the Communist-led insurgency (1948–60), section 8(1) of the act allows police to arrest without warrant any person suspected of acting in “any manner prejudicial to the security of Malaysia ...or the economic life thereof” and to detain them for up to sixty days without trial. After sixty days, a person may be further detained for a period of two years, with the approval of the minister of Home Affairs, thus permitting indeﬁnite detention without trial. Inaddition, section 22(1) enables the minister to ban the printing and circulation of any publication that is considered to be a threat to security and public order. Although the original intention of the act was to check internal subversion, in practice it has been used against leaders of opposition parties and social inter- est groups, 35including most famously the former deputy prime minister, Anwar Ibrahim, in 1998. The ISA has also been used against journalists. It was ﬁrst used to silence critical media coverage in 1976 when Samani Mohd Amin, the assistant news editor of Berita Harian , and Tan Sri Samad Ismail, the managing editor and deputy editor-in-chief of the New Straits Times , were arrested and detained for ﬁve years. More recently, in 2001, the social activist Hishamuddin Rais, then a columnist for the online news service Malaysiakini was detained under the ISA for two years,36while in 2008 the prominent civil rights activist and blogger Raja Petra Kamaruddin was detained for two months.37 The Ofﬁcial Secrets Act (OSA), passed in 1972, gives the government the power to prosecute any journalist who publishes ofﬁcial information without authorization. Section 2 of the act has a particularly liberal deﬁnition of what constitutes ofﬁcial information, effectively allowing any minister or public ofﬁcialto classify material as “secret” or “restricted.” Furthermore, article 16A of the act prohibits any legal challenge to such decisions, making the minister or public ofﬁcial’s decision ﬁnal and binding. Although less widely used against politicalopponents, the OSA has been used on a number of notable occasions. In 1976, for example, the leader of the Democratic Action Party, Lim Kit Siang, was convicted for receiving information concerning the purchase of Swedish warships by the Malaysian navy. 38More recently, in 2000, the youth chief of the opposition party Keadilan, Mohamad Ezam Mohd Nor, was convicted for the disclosure of twoclassiﬁed reports by the Anti Corruption Agency concerning an investigation into Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 15 corruption by Minister of International Trade and Industry Raﬁdah Aziz and the former Chief Minister of Melaka Rahim Tamby.39Similarly, the act has also been used against journalists. In 1995, two journalists working for Harian Metro were arrested under the OSA for reporting a story about a local kidnapping case.The journalists were arrested and remanded in custody because the local police considered that the information they had reproduced was classiﬁed. 40 The Sedition Act (1948) was originally passed by the British colonial adminis- tration as a means to contain anticolonial unrest during the Communist insurgency known as the Emergency (1948–60). In addition to having a deliberately vague deﬁnition of sedition,41after the 1969 race riots, it became an important tool in the implementation of the socioeconomic and cultural policies that favor the dominant Malay ethnic group. Thus the act now prohibits the public or even parliamentary questioning of “sensitive” constitutional issues. Such “sensitive issues” includeMalay special privileges, the status of Malay as both the ofﬁcial and national language, the status of Islam as the “ofﬁcial” religion, the citizenship rights of non-Malays, and the sovereignty of the Malay rulers. 42Additionally, section 4(1) (b) of the act prohibits prompting “disaffection with the administration of justice in Malaysia,”43while section 9(1) also makes it a crime to both be in the possession of any publication that could be deemed seditious and to publish an article thatcould be deemed seditious. The Printing Presses and Publications Act (PPPA) of 1984 is the most explicit form of legislative control of press freedom. Again this legislation has its origins in measures originally introduced by the British during the Emergency in 1948—in this case, the Printing Presses Ordinance. This was subsequently extended andtightened after the 1969 race riots culminating in the 1984 act. Of most note, section 3 of the act requires allpublications to apply for an annual permit from the Home Ministry, which can be refused, revoked, or suspended at the minister’sdiscretion without judicial review. Additionally, section 7 allows the government to ban the publication, circulation, or import of any books that it deems prejudicial to public order, morality, or security, while section 8A(1) provides for a jail term orheavy ﬁne for any editors, journalists, publishers, or individuals for “maliciously printing false information.” 44 The PPPA has been used on several occasions to ban or restrict the publication of newspapers published by opposition political parties—most notably in March 2000, when the Islamic party PAS was forced to restrict the publication of its newspaper Harakah from biweekly to bimonthly.45Additionally, critical maga- zines such as Detik ,Tamadun , and Wasilah were all effectively banned following the revocation of their licenses during the “Reformasi” protests of 1998 and 1999.46 However, the act has also been used against more mainstream newspapers. Duringthe charged racial tensions of 1987, the Chinese-language newspaper Sin Chew Daily and the English-language Star, both had their licenses revoked. 47More recently, in 2007, the Tamil newspaper Makkal Osai had its license suspended 16 Asian Affairs: An American Review TABLE 13. Malaysia’s Rank in the Reporters without Borders Press Freedom Index (2005–9) Year 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Rank 122 104 = 110 113 92 124 132 131 Total 167 166 159 167 168 169 173 175 Source: Data derived from Reporters without Borders annual reports, 2005–9, http://www.rsf .org/ following the publication of a picture that depicted Jesus holding a cigarette in one hand and a can of beer in the other.48The following February, the Home Ministry initially did not renew the newspaper’s license, claiming the decision was made be- cause certain licensing guidelines had been breached.49Although critics protested that the decision was more likely a result of news coverage given to the opposition,the paper was permitted to continue publishing following a successful appeal. 50 The overall result of such legislative checks, together with their repeated use, means that the media in Malaysia is at best “shackled”51and at worst subject to stringent—even authoritarian52—controls. Indeed, as table 13 shows, the mean rank between 2005 and 2009 in the Reporters without Borders Press Freedom Index has been 116, consistently placing the country among the worst-performing 25–33 percent (with the exceptions of 2003 and 2006). Furthermore, whereas between 2002 and 2006 the trend was toward greater freedom, since 2007 therehas been a noticeable reversal of this. Structural/Institutional Factors: Newspaper Ownership in Malaysia The second major explanation for progovernment bias is the extent to which media ownership has been concentrated in a small number of companies that are linked to the state indirectly through “political patronage or trustee proxies” 53 that ensure that “the bulk of media equity in Malaysia is controlled by a minority circle of UMNO, MCA [Malaysian Chinese Association], MIC [Malaysian Indian Congress] holding companies alongside other business elites aligned to the Barisan.”54Indeed, most commentators55claim that allof the twelve major national daily newspapers are owned or controlled by the ruling coalition or private individuals closely connected with the constituent political parties of thegovernment, although the precise details of that ownership is notoriously difﬁcult to obtain because of a profusion of holding companies and a lack of transparency. Of the newspapers in this survey, it is widely regarded that the most explicit control by UMNO is of the Utusan group that publishes Utusan Malaysia .I nt h e Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 17 early 1960s, an initial attempt by UMNO to inﬂuence editorial policy over the newspaper led to a ninety-three-day strike led by its editor, Said Zahari. UMNO’s response to the strike was a takeover that ensured its inﬂuence over the group.56 Indeed, Said Zahari himself argues that the effect of the takeover represented “[t]he death of press freedom. ...It was a turning point when you talk about control of the press. ...It started with Utusan .”57Today it is estimated that UMNO and its nominees control more than 50 percent of the shares in the Utusan group.58 Perhaps the most important actor in the Malaysian media is the conglomerate Media Prima, which over the past six years has emerged as the country’s leading media company. The group was created out of a demerger of the MalaysianResources Corporation and quickly went on to acquire stakes in multiple television and radio stations as well as newspapers. By 2005, the company’s acquisitions meant that it was the owner of all private free-to-air television networks in thecountry, giving it control over stations responsible for over half of the country’s television viewership. 59Furthermore, among the companies it controls is the New Straits Times Press, which publishes four of the country’s daily newspapers: TheEnglish-language publications the New Straits Times and the Malay Mail as well as the Malay-language dailies Berita Harian and Harian Metro . Together these newspapers comprise approximately half of the country’s daily newspaper outputreaching an average combined readership of approximately 2 million. 60In terms of ownership of the company, the largest shareholder (15.7 percent) in Media Prima is the private ﬁrm Gabungan Kasturi. Little is known about the company but a 2005 report in Business Times claimed that it was owned by Amanah Raya, which is a trust management company wholly owned by the Malaysian governmentthrough the Ministry of Finance. 61In addition, a further 14.9 percent of the shares are controlled by the Malaysia Employees Provident Fund (EPF) a government agency charged with encouraging long-term banking to mitigate for retirement,unemployment or sickness. 62 Examining the Chinese-language press, media tycoon Tiong Hiew King’s Me- dia China International controls the four leading Chinese dailies: Sin Chew Jit Poh , Nanyang ,Guang Ming Daily , and China Press , which between them account for a whopping 89 percent of the market. Tiong ﬁrst diversiﬁed into media in 1988, when he was invited to revive Malaysia’s Sin Chew Jit Poh by its employees and senior leaders of the Chinese community. Sin Chew has previously had a reputa- tion for being fairly outspoken but had been closed down by then Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad during the infamous “Operation Lalang” crackdown, whichresulted in the detention of more than 100 political dissidents. When Sin Chew acquired Guang Ming Daily in 1992 an effective duopoly in the Chinese print media emerged with the other two major dailies, Nanyang andChina Press , then owned by businessman Quek Leng Chan. In 2000, when the factionalized Malaysian Chinese Association, the second- largest constituent party in the governing coalition, split between its president and 18 Asian Affairs: An American Review his deputy, Sin Chew sided with the former while Nanyang sided with the latter. Following the loss of the Lunas by-election in November that year, in which large numbers of Chinese voters switched to the opposition, Mahathir blamed Nanyang andChina Press for inﬂuencing the vote. Pressure soon mounted on Quek Leng Chan who, amid vigorous protests, sold the two papers to Huaren Holdings—the investment arm of the MCA.63Tiong later gradually acquired Nanyang’s shares from the MCA and by October 2006 had taken a controlling 44.8 percent stakein the company, thereby delivering him control of all four of the major Chinese dailies. Of the remaining major newspapers, 42 percent of the shares in the best-selling English-language daily the Star are owned by the MCA’s Huaren Holdings, 64 while the free English-language newspaper the Sun is owned by the Berjaya Group, a major Malaysian conglomerate owned by Vincent Tan whose closepersonal relations with prominent UMNO elites is noted by several commentators, including Malaysian political scientists Edmund I. Gomez 65and K. S. Jomo.66In their detailed analysis of the political ties between UMNO and major corporateconglomerates, Gomez and Jomo detail the extent to which the privatization program of the 1980s and 1990s beneﬁted a select group of individuals and UMNO-related companies such as the Berjaya, Hong Leong, and Renong groups.The net result of this ensures that, in Gomez’s opinion, “[t]here are few other political parties in any part of the world which have control over such a wide range of business ventures as do the United Malays National Organisation.” 67 Although the extent to which such relations bear a direct relationship on jour- nalistic and editorial freedom is difﬁcult to measure, widespread government, andmore speciﬁcally, party involvement in business is nevertheless a deﬁning feature of Malaysia’s political economy, 68creating a situation in which “the bulk of media equity ...is controlled by a minority circle of UMNO, MCA and MIC holding companies alongside other business elites aligned to the Barisan.”69 Cultural and Environmental Factors Although Malaysia consistently scores poorly in indexes of press freedom it is the contention of this research project that legislative and institutional factors are not the only cause of the country’s media being “shackled.”70In an environment in which the print media is almost overwhelmingly in private hands, the project con- tends that there are less visible and more subtle mechanisms of control.71Clearly, the very existence of the various legal mechanisms by which the government cansilence the media itself will shape the behavior and conduct of journalists. As Freedom House states in its 2009 Freedom of the Press report on Malaysia, “a his- tory of political interference in coverage of certain issues has fostered a culture ofself-censorship among traditional media.” 72As Nash Rahman, former chief editor Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 19 ofBerita Harian comments, “[i]n the mainstream media, reporters keep things to themselves because the editors will throw it away, or they will get scolded.”73 Viewed in this light, sporadic raids on opposition media organizations, the denial of permits to publish, the threat of defamation or the interrogation ofprominent bloggers under the ISA are intended to send out a strong message that the government means business. Such “posturing” is sometimes as important as actual enforceability in authoritarian environments. 74In addition to self-censorship by individual journalists themselves, other more subtle forms of control would include editorial veto, the threat of advertiser boycotts, and direct inﬂuence by political actors on editors and owners, what John Hilley refers to as “quiet warnings.”75 In contrast, Graham Brown, in his 2005 analysis of the Malaysian media, is less pessimistic about the extent to which Malaysian journalists are subservient to the political regime.76He cites prominent protests by newspaper staff to various takeovers and mergers, as well as persistent vocal protest against legislation that impinges on press freedom by the National Union of Journalists, as evidence that many continue to “pursue their profession with relative independence and chafeat limitations placed upon them.” 77 Therefore, the second part of this project aims to attempt to measure the degree to which such mechanisms impact press freedom by carrying out survey researchamong Malaysian journalists. The goal will be to gather survey data from sufﬁcient numbers of journalists to have a conﬁdence interval of between 4 and 5 percent. In addition, the survey will be supplemented with qualitative interviews of journalists in the survey. In this preliminary report, however, the survey data is supplemented and substituted by an analysis of socioeconomic, cultural, and political values inMalaysia, and the degree to which these impact attitudes toward press freedom and political liberalism. As noted elsewhere, 78an interesting feature of Malaysia’s political regime is that the middle classes have not proven, as of yet, to be the agents of democratic change that transition theorists expect.79Instead, the Malaysian middle classes have proven to be at best ambivalent, and at worst indifferent, in their attitudestoward democracy. A recent 2009 study by Pew of “Views on Democracy, Religion, Values, and Life Satisfaction in Emerging Nations” 80found that only 34 percent of the Malaysian middle class rated freedom of speech as being “very important.”whereas only 35 percent rated freedom of the press as “very important.” 81Indeed, when asked which of four speciﬁed freedoms was of most importance to them, the freedom that was selected by the largest percentage of the Malaysian middleclass surveyed was freedom from poverty and violence (44 percent). 82 Such ﬁndings are also reﬂected in one of the largest publicly available measures of attitudes and values—the World Values Survey database, produced and main- tained by the World Values Survey Association (see table 14). The World Values Survey conducted its research in Malaysia in 2006, using a sample of 1,200, fromwhich the data in table 14 were selected. From their results, I have selected the TABLE 14. Aims of Country: First Choice for High-Performing Asian Economies Selected South Country Korea China Taiwan Thailand Indonesia Vietnam Malaysia High growth 57 .9% 45 .3% 69 .9% 67 .7% 82 .4% 68 .5% 65 .1% Strong defence 7 .0% 22 .7% 9 .9% 21 .4% 6 .0% 11 .6% 18 .4% People have more say about how things are done23.9% 8 .1% 4 .9% 8 .3% 7 .9% 9 .4% 11 .3% Make our cities and countryside morebeautiful11.3% 23 .9% 15 .4% 2 .7% 3 .7% 10 .5% 5 .2% Total 1,200 1,562 1,224 1,490 1,903 1,462 1,178 (100%) (100%) (100%) (100%) (100%) (100%) (100%) Source: Data derived from World Values Database, http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org/ 20 Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 21 most salient variables to further illustrate the prevalence of cautious and arguably conservative attitudes and values concerning politics and political expression. Of particular note for this study was a measure of the degree of conﬁdence in the print media—variable 133. Curiously, whereas one might expect relatively low levelsof conﬁdence given the constraints on press freedom, a majority of Malaysians, 63 percent, expressed either a great deal (13.3 percent) or quite a lot of conﬁdence (50.4 percent) in the press, against 36.3 percent, who either had not very much orno conﬁdence at all. 83 Similarly in terms of the overall measure of freedom in Malaysia, variable 163 measured the level of “democraticness” within the respondents own country.On a ten-point scale (in which completely undemocratic was 0 and completely democratic 10) the mean score was 7, which was, for example, higher than respon- dents from the United States. While perhaps surprising, the result (and arguablythe previous one, as well) suggests that, within the sample, respondents do not necessarily share the opinions of foreign observers who routinely count Malaysia as a semidemocratic or quasidemocratic regime. Another reﬂection of the political ambivalence of Malaysians can be ascertained from the responses to variables 96, 97, and 98, which were designed to measure political action. These three variables measure whether the respondent would,respectively, sign a petition, take part in a boycott and attend a lawful/peaceful demonstration. The results are quite striking, with 67 percent stating they would never sign a petition, 80 percent that they would never join a boycott, and 71.9 percent that they would never take part in a demonstration. Given that in the same survey, 65.7 percent of respondents expressed little if any interest in politics,it would be prudent to avoid drawing too many conclusions from these results. However, it can be speculated at this stage that such strong rejection of legitimate forms of political action might represent not only conservative values but preciselythe degree of self-control that equally results in self-censorship by journalists. Finally, variable 69 sought to measure what the respondent believed the prin- cipal aim of the country should be. Here, 63 percent of Malaysians felt economicgrowth was the number one priority for their country—with the aim that “People have more say about how things are done” (measuring for greater participation in politics) in third place with only 11 percent. This degree of developmen-tal legitimacy has been noted in many studies 84of the “high performing Asian economies”85and, indeed, comparing Malaysia’s results with other countries in the region reveals a higher preference for development over greater political partic-ipation. Such views resonate with the conclusions of Abduhl Rahman Embong 86 and Kok Lah Loh87who argued that because the “new” middle classes in Malaysia have beneﬁted disproportionately from Malaysia’s economic growth, rather than become agents of change they instead are a materialist, self-centred group whose position “converges with that of the Malaysian state.”88 22 Asian Affairs: An American Review In Malaysia, this lack of reformist zeal is likely to be a result of two related factors: 1. The ethnic and racial segmentation of the middle classes militates against a coherent, uniﬁed actor. Although, in both 1999 and in 2008, interethnic coalitions were formed between the opposition political parties, there con-tinues to be a noticeable lack of integration among the Malay and Chinese middle classes, partly because interracial marriage is extremely rare. 89Ad- ditionally, as Johan Saravanmuttu notes, “ethnic factions of the middle class [are] in competition with one another for educational, employment, promo- tion and business opportunities.”90The ethnic Chinese in particular ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to organize collectively given the country’s history and the dominant role that ethnicity has played and continues to play in the coun- try’s politics. This lack of integration arguably results in mutually suspiciousindigenous communities. 91 2. A sizeable segment of Malaysia’s middle classes are dependent on the state, either directly for employment, or indirectly for privileged contracts, entitle-ment programmes, patronage and rent-seeking opportunities. Much of this dependency is the result of an afﬁrmative action policy that has been at the centre of government policy since the launch of the New Economic Policy(NEP) in 1971. The policy, which was designed to raise the ratio of Malay and Bumiputera equity to 30 percent by 1990 92from less than 2 percent at its launch, resulted in a whole swathe of quotas and positive discrimina-tion, especially in higher education, and has effectively continued in various different guises since 1990. 93Although it has redressed the “lopsided oc- cupational situation at the time of independence”94resulting in Malaysian society becoming more middle class as a whole,95critics of the policy argue that it has bred a culture of dependency on the state among the Malay middle classes. In their 1994 study David Martin Jones and David Brawn reached a similar conclusion, arguing that whereas in Europe and the United States the experience of liberal capitalism was grounded in competitive individualismand entrepreneurialism, in East Asia the dependence on state-led develop- ment has created “a middle class constantly anxious about instability and insecurity.” 96Such conclusions seem to be upheld by the survey results of the Pew Global Attitudes Survey mentioned earlier and have been noted by Malaysia’s political elite.97For example, in his address to the ﬁfty-ﬁfth UMNO General Assembly in 2004, Prime Minister Abdullah controversiallycriticized the NEP urging Malays to rid themselves of their “crutches.” 98 Other explanations for the lack of support for political liberalization among the middle classes have attributed this to cultural factors,99speciﬁcally that some Asian authoritarian leaders have chosen to emphasize communitarian values over Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 23 individual needs and freedom, and consensus and harmony over conﬂict. Mahathir in Malaysia and Lee Kwan Yew in Singapore adopted such arguments themselves to argue that there was a distinct Asian form of democracy and that liberal democ- racy as practised in the West was culturally alien to East Asians.100Nevertheless the debate on this latter factor among social scientists has proven very controversial and is of only limited relevance to this study. Conclusion This article provides an interim report of a wider quantitative analysis of po- litical bias in the Malaysian print media. Having initially identiﬁed two Malay- language newspapers, Utusan Malaysia and Berita Harain , as part of the six- newspaper selection for the wider study it ﬁrstly coded these newspapers for twofour-week periods in 2006 and 2008, respectively. The second period coincided with the twelvth general election on March 8, 2008, while the ﬁrst period was used as a control and for comparison. In total, 1,488 items were coded and, from the data analyzed, the following conclusions were derived. First, both newspapers displayed a strong bias toward the ruling coalition that has governed Malaysia since independence in 1957. Second, both newspapers were critical in their coverage of the opposition, although outside of this election period, coverage of the opposition was largely conspicuous by itsabsence. Third, although the mean bias measured of the two newspapers in this preliminary report did not differ widely, data from various t-tests revealed that Utusan Malaysia nevertheless was more positive in its coverage of the government than Berita Harian . Conversely, at least in the 2008 data set, Berita Harian provided marginally less critical coverage of the opposition. The same general conclusion was also observed where the data was coded for evaluation of an actorin an item and in evaluation of an actor in a photograph. In terms of reporter tone, the most interesting result was that the vast majority of reports were purely descriptive providing little context, analysis or critique. Where a reporter diddepart from simple description, it was invariably to reinforce the report rather than to deviate from it. None of these results come as a surprise, as the conventional wisdom, as indi- cated in the introduction, is that the mainstream print media, and especially the Malay-language dailies, are overtly progovernment in their coverage. Neverthe- less, robust quantitative analysis of this had been identiﬁed as missing from the academic literature on Malaysian politics, and thus such analysis as presented here does ﬁll an evident gap in the literature. Clearly, questions can be raised aboutthe extent to which the preconceptions of the researchers may have colored their assessment of the bias in the newspapers under investigation. Partly for this reason, as mentioned earlier, the decision was taken to choose one native Malay speakerfrom Malaysia and the other from neighboring Singapore. What was striking in 24 Asian Affairs: An American Review their results was the degree of commonality in their ﬁndings, particularly evident if one views ﬁgures A1–A6, which chart the mean bias over time. In addition, preliminary results from the author’s coding of data from the New Straits Times for the 2008 period similarly reveals a progovernment bias that likewise increasesnoticeably at three points: after February 13 (the dissolution of parliament), Febru- ary 24 (the deadline for the nomination of candidates), and March 6–8 (the ﬁnal few days before polling day). The second part of this article provided an explanation for the ﬁndings examin- ing the legislative framework within which the media operates in Malaysia, corpo- rate ownership of Malaysian newspapers, and its perceived impact, and the extentto which the lack of critical reportage can be explained by analyzing the cultural, social, and political values that predominate within the country. The conclusion to be drawn from this second section is that strict legislative controls, combined withcorporate ownership, linking the overwhelming majority of Malaysian newspapers directly or indirectly to the constituent political parties of the governing coalition, encourages self-censorship among Malaysian journalists. Furthermore, analysisof cultural values suggests that a majority of Malaysians have more conﬁdence in the press than might be expected, given the semidemocratic nature of the regime. Additionally, freedom of the press is highlighted as less of a concern than socialand economic well-being. Indeed, few Malaysians indicate a willingness to coun- tenance the active participation in political action, preferring instead to emphasize economic growth as the priority for the country as a whole. Future research will code and analyze two Chinese-language and two English- language daily newspapers to determine whether the progovernment bias demon-strated in this article is repeated across the print media as a whole and whether any of the non-Malay language newspapers are markedly less positive in their cover- age of the government. Additionally, it is anticipated that surveys of newspaperjournalists will enable data to be analyzed so as to draw meaningful comparisons of the various explanations for the existence, persistence and degree of political bias in Malaysia. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This article was presented at the 49th meeting of the Southeast Conference of the Association of Asian Studies University of Louisville, Louisville, KY , January 15–17, 2010. The author would like to thank the two Malay researchers (one Singaporean, one Malaysian) who coded the data from Utusan Malaysia and Berita Harian , respectively. At their request, they remain anonymous. Thanks also to James Nye for trawling over the piece with his usual meticulous attention to detail, and to Dr. TerezaCapelos and Dr. Jane Fielding of the University of Surrey, England, for help with the statistical analysis. NOTES 1. For example, M. Connors, Democracy and National Identity in Thailand (New York: Rout- ledge, 2003); William Case, Politics in Southeast Asia (Richmond, V A: Curzon, 2002); John Funston, Government and Politics in Southeast Asia (Singapore: ISEAS, 2001); James Jesudason, “Statist Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 25 Democracy and the Limits to Civil Society in Malaysia,” Journal of Commonwealth and Comparative Politics 33, no. 3 (1995): 335–56; “The Syncretic State and the Structuring of Oppositional Poli- tics in Malaysia,” in Political Oppositions in Industrializing Asia, ed. Gary Rodan, 128–60 (London: Routledge, 1996); Gordon Means, “Soft Authoritarianism in Malaysia and Singapore,” Journal of Democracy 7, no. 4 (1996): 103–17; and Kheang Un, “Patronage Politics and Hybrid Democracy: Political Change in Cambodia 1993–2003,” Asian Perspectives 29, no. 5 (2005): 203–30. 2. See, for example, Jason P. Abbott, “Malaysia’s Transitional Moment? Democratic Transition Theory and the Problem of Malaysian Exceptionalism,” Southeast Asia Research 17, no. 2 (2009): 175–200; Graham Brown, “The Rough and Rosy Road: Sites of Contestation in Malaysia’s ShackledMedia Industry,” Paciﬁc Affair s 78 (2005): 39–56; William Case, “Malaysia: Still the Semi-democratic Paradigm,” Asian Studies Review 21, no. 2–3 (1997): 79–90; William Case, “Manipulative Skills: How Do Rulers Control the Electoral Arena?” in Electoral Authoritarianism: The Dynamics of Unfree Competition , ed. Andreas Schedler, 95–112 (Boulder, CO: Reinner, 2006); Harold Crouch, “Malaysia: Neither Authoritarian nor Democratic,” in Southeast Asia in the 1990s, ed. Kevin Hewison, Richard Robison, and Gary Rodan (Sydney: Allen & Unwin, 1993); John Hilley, Malaysia: Mahathirism, Hegemony and the New Opposition (London: Zed, 2001); Means, “Soft Authoritarianism”; Jesuda- son, “Statist Democracy”; “The Syncretic State”; Mohd Azizuddin Mohd Sani, “Media Freedom inMalaysia,” Journal of Contemporary Asia 35 (2005): 341–67; and Bridget Welsh, “Attitudes toward Democracy in Malaysia: Challenges to the Regime?” Asian Survey 36, no. 9 (1996): 882–903. 3. Edmund T. Gomez, Political Business: Corporate Involvement of Malaysian Political Parties (Townsville, Australia: James Cook University Press, 1994); and Edmund T. Gomez and K. S. Jomo,Malaysia’s Political Economy: Politics, Patronage and Proﬁts (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997). 4. Wong Kok Keong, “Unfair Coverage: A Look at the Mainstream Media’s Bias in the 1999 General Election,” Aliran Monthly , January 2001, http://www.aliran.com/oldsite/monthly/2001/1b .html (accessed November 6, 2009); “Propagandists for the BN (Part 2),” Aliran Monthly , May 2004, http://www.aliran.com/oldsite/monthly/2004a/6d.html (accessed November 6, 2009); and Centre for Independent Journalism, “Report on the Quantitative Analysis of the Media Monitoring Initiative forthe 12th General Elections,” March 29, 2008, http://www.cijmalaysia.org/images/documents/report%20on%20the%20media%20monitoring%200308.pdf (accessed October 25, 2009). 5. 120 and 54 items, respectively. 6. Wong, “Unfair Coverage.”7. Wong, “Propagandists for the BN (Part 2).” 8. 94 and 65, respectively. 9. Centre for Independent Journalism, “Report on the Quantitative Analysis,” 9. 10. Ibid.11. Ibid., 2. 12. The Comparative National Elections Project is run out of the Ohio State University. The project involves a multiyear, multicounty study of how citizens in democracies worldwide receivedinformation about issues, candidates, and politics during election campaigns. For more information,see Richard Gunther, “Comparative National Elections Project,” Mershon Center for International Studies, http://mershoncenter.osu.edu/expertise/institutions/cnep.htm. 13. In Malaysia, the government principally uses a category known as Bumiputra (son of the earth/land) to deﬁne a melange of ethnicities that comprises Malays and the principal indigenousgroups of Sabah and Sarawak. The variance therefore comes from whether we measure Malays as distinct from the Bumiputra category or not—thus the variance is in the Bumiputra category. 14. Nielsen Media, “Mainstream Media Continues to Lead Malaysia’s Media Scene, Internet Penetration Doubles in Five Years,” October 23, 2008, http://my.nielsen.com/news/20081023.shtml(accessed November 20, 2009). 15. There are an additional two Chinese newspapers, Kwong Wah (1 percent readership) and Oriental Daily News (less than 1 percent). 16. There are two additional daily Tamil language newspapers, Tamil Nesan and Makkal Osai . However, have a readership below 1 percent. 17. Gomez, Political Business ; Gomez and Jomo, Malaysia’s Political Economy ; Hilley, Malaysia: Mahathirism, Hegemony . 26 Asian Affairs: An American Review 18. See Teck Ghee Lim, “Utusan Malaysia: Messenger of Hate and Spite on Religion and Race,” CPI Writings, Centre for Policy Initiative, December 15, 2009, http://english.cpiasia.net/index.php(accessed January 28, 2010); Lim Kit Siang, “When Will Utusan Malaysia Stop Being a Racist News- paper of Untruths and Falsehoods and Honour the Journalistic Maxim, Comment Is Free but Facts Are Sacred?” comment posted on, “Lim Kit Siang for Malaysia,” July 4, 2009, http://blog.limkitsiang.com/2009/07/04 (accessed December 14, 2009); Greg Lopez, “Utusan Malaysia: A Messengerof Hate?” comment posted on New Mandala, December 21, 2009, http://asiapaciﬁc.anu.edu.au/ newmandala/2009/12/21/utusan-malaysia-a-messenger-of-hate/ (accessed February 5, 2010); and “Bouquets or Brickbats, He Stands by What Is Right,” New Straits Times, December 17, 2009, http://www.nst.com.my/articles/4sha/Article/ (accessed February 5, 2010). 19. Bernama, “Utusan Malaysia Boycotted for Spreading Racial Sentiments, Perak MB,” June 17, 2008, http://www.bernama.com/bernama/v5/newsindex.php?id=340133 (accessed December 17, 2009). 20. E-mail correspondence with Teresa Kok, April 8, 2010.21. Debra Chong, “Teresa Kok Unfazed by Utusan Attack,” Malaysia Today , October 15, 2008, http://mt.m2day.org/2008/content/view/13835/ (accessed November 24, 2009). 22. With codes 0 and 8 representing no explicit reference and no evaluative comment, respectively.23. An interesting note is that no items were coded in the Berita Harian sample as being extremely progovernment. This would reﬂect views among Malays that of the two papers in the survey, Berita Harian is generally considered less progovernment than Utusan Malaysia , although the difference in mean is small. 24. Of those items coded, the means were 3.5 in Utusan Malaysia a n d4i n Berita Harian . 25. Comparisons for opposition bias in the 2006 data set are not available as the sample size is too small. 26. See, for example, Brown, “Rough and Rosy Road”; and Hilley, Malaysia: Mahathirism, Hegemony. 27. Brown, “Rough and Rosy Road,” 44. 28. It is unsurprising that Hishammudin Hussein would appear more frequently in Utusan Malaysia than in Berita Harian , as Hishammudin is a controversial Malaysian politician most known for a ﬁery nationalist pro-Malay rights speech he gave in 2005 to the UMNO general assembly in which he wielded the ceremonial Malay sword, the keris, in his right hand. 29. For example, “Harga minyak naik 30 sen” [Oil Price Increase of 30 Sen], Berita Harian , February 28, 2006, 1. 30. Approximately U.S. $0.10. 31. Notable exceptions include James Chin, “ Malaysiakini and Its Impact on Journalism and Politics in Malaysia,” in Asia.com: Asia Encounters the Internet , ed. Kong-Chong Ho, Randy Kluver, Kenneth C. C. Yang, 129–42 (London: Routledge Curzon, 2003); and Zahoram Nairn, “The Media and Malaysia’s Reformasi Movement,” in Media Fortunes Changing Times: Asean States in Transition ,e d . Russell H. K. Heng, 119–38 (Singapore: Institute for Southeast Asian Studies, 2002). 32. Government of Malaysia, Federal Constitution (Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: International Law Book Services, 2008). 33. Ibid. 34. Also article 182, which concerns a special court that may be convened against the country’s rotation monarch or any ruler of a state. 35. The most extensive use of the act was in 1987, when 106 opposition ﬁgures and nongovern- mental organization activists were arrested and detained. 36. “Hishamuddin Rais: We’re Excellent at ‘Bodekcology,”’ Malaysian Digest , January 13, 2010, http://www.malaysiandigest.com/features/42-personality/1631-hishamuddin-rais-were-excellent.html(accessed February 18, 2010). 37. “Malaysia Blogger’s Arrest Creates Dangerous Precedent,” Guardian , September 12, 2008, http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/blog/2008/sep/12/malaysia.internet (accessed December 11, 2009). 38. Sani, “Media Freedom,” 349. 39. Ibid. 40. Ibid.41. Brown, “Rough and Rosy Road.” Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 27 42. Cynthia Joseph, “‘It Is So Unfair Here ...It Is So Biased’: Negotiating the Politics of Ethnic Identiﬁcation in Ways of Being Malaysian Schoolgirls,” Asian Ethnicity 7, no. 1 (2006): 53–73. 43. This section was most famously used to imprison Lim Guan Eng, the current chief minis- ter of the state of Penang, in 1995 for challenging the way in which the attorney general had dealt with allegations that the chief minister of Melaka had raped a Malay school girl. See Amnesty In-ternational, “Malaysia, the Trial of Opposition Parliamentarian Lim Guan Eng: An Update,” March1, 1997, http://asiapaciﬁc.amnesty.org/library/Index/ENGASA280031997?open&of=ENG-MYS (ac- cessed December 11, 2009). 44. Ibid.45. Jason P. Abbott, “Democracy@internet.asia? The Challenges to the Emancipatory Potential of the Net: Lessons from China and Malaysia,” Third World Quarterly 22, no. 1 (2001): 99–114. 46. Brown, “Rough and Rosy Road.” 47. Sani, “Media Freedom.”48. “Critics Slam Malaysia Ban over ‘Smoking Jesus,”’ Times of India , August 25, 2007, http://www.indianmalaysian.com/sound/modules.php?name=News&ﬁle=article&sid=605 (accessed November 25, 2009). 49. “Paper Shut Down for Breaching Guidelines,” Star (Malaysia), April 18, 2008, http://thestar .com.my/news/story.asp?ﬁle=/2008/4/18/nation/20987996 (accessed November 25, 2009). 50. “Makkal Osai Will Be Back on the Streets Saturday,” Star (Malaysia), April 25, 2008, http: //thestar.com.my/news/story.asp?ﬁle=/2008/4/25/nation/21057503 (accessed November 25, 2009). 51. Brown, “Rough and Rosy Road.”52. Sani, “Media Freedom.” 53. Hilley, Malaysia: Mahathirism, Hegemony , 121. 54. Ibid.55. Brown, “Rough and Rosy Road”; Gomez, Political Business ; Anil Netto, “Media Prima: Rise of a Media Monopoly,” Malaysiakini , September 5, 2005, http://www.malaysiakini.com/opinions/ 3993. (accessed November 29, 2009); “Malaysian Media Giant Grasps for Internet,” November 29, 2007, http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast Asia/IK29Ae02.html (accessed November 29, 2009); K. Anuar Mustafar, “Deﬁning Democratic Discourses: The Mainstream Press,” in Democracy in Malaysia: Discourses and Practices , ed. Francis Loh Kok Wah and Khoo Boo Tiek, 138–64 (London: Curzon, 2002); and Gary Rodan, Transpaency and Authoritarian Rule in Southeast Asia :Singapore and Malaysia (London: Routledge, 2005). 56. Mustafar, “Deﬁning Democratic Discourses,” 146. 57. Zedeck Siew, “A Strike for Press Freedom,” Nut Graph , November 18, 2008, http://www .thenutgraph.com/strike-for-press-freedom (accessed December 15, 2009). 58. Kadir Jasin, “NSTP-Utusan Merger Courts Controversy,” Malaysian Business , December 16, 2006, http://ﬁndarticles.com/p/articles/mi qn6207/is 20061216/ai n24910613/ (accessed November 24, 2009). 59. Netto, “Malaysian Media Giant Grasps for Internet.”60. Ibid.61. “Gabungan Kesturi, EPF Raise Stakes in Media Prima,” Business Times, January 8, 2005. 62. Netto, “Media Prima: Rise of a Media Monopoly.” 63. Sin Chew ’s perceived collaboration in the Nanyang takeover led to a mass boycott by more than ninety columnists and commentators of all four newspapers. 64. Kim-Hui Lim “ Ad Baculum , Islamic State and Malaysian Chinese Politics: A Rhetorical Study of Selected Political Advertisements in the Local Chinese Media during the 11th Malaysian General Election Campaign,” Journal of Politics and Law 1, no. 1 (2008): 31. 65. Edmund T. Gomez, Politics in Business: UMNO’s Corporate Investments (Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: Forum, 1990); and Gomez, Political Business . 66. Gomez and Jomo, Malaysia’s Political Economy . 67. Gomez, Politics in Business , 166. 68. Ibid; see also Gomez and Jomo , Malaysia’s Political Economy . 69. Hilley, Malaysia: Mahathirism, Hegemony , 121 70. Brown, “Rough and Rosy Road.”71. Gary Rodan, Transpaency and Authoritarian Rule . 28 Asian Affairs: An American Review 72. Freedom House, “Freedom of the Press Index and Report,” 2009 http://www.freedomhouse .org/template.cfm?page=16 (accessed December 14, 2009). 73. Janet Steele, “Professionalism Online: How Malaysiakini Challenges Authoritarianism,” International Journal of Press/Politics 14, no. 1 (2009): 91–112. 74. Abbott, “Democracy@internet.asia,” 104.75. Hilley, Malaysia: Mahathirism, Hegemony , 120. 76. Brown, “Rough and Rosy Road,” 43. 77. Ibid. 78. Jason P. Abbott and Sophie Gregorios-Pippas, “Islamization in Malaysia: Processes and Dy- namics,” Contemporary Politics 16, no. 2 (2010): 135–51. 79. Ibid. 80. Pew Global Attitudes Project, The Global Middle Class: Views on Democracy, Religion, Values, and Life Satisfaction in Emerging Nations (Washington, DC: Pew Research, 2009) http: //pewglobal.org/commentary/pdf/1051.pdf (accessed December 14, 2009) 81. Such views echo those of Welsh, whose study, conducted in 1996, revealed that although 86 percent of respondents supported freedom of the press, 60 percent agreed to the close relationship between the media and the government. Moreover, only 40 percent were willing to use the media tovoice out sensitive issues such as race or religion. Welsh, “Attitudes toward Democracy,” 894. 82. The other three freedoms in this section of the survey were being free to speak, being free to practice religion, and being free from hunger and poverty. Pew Global Attitudes Project, The Global Middle Class . 83. World Values Survey Association, “World Values Survey,” 2006, http://www.worldvalues survey.org/ (accessed November 20, 2009). 84. For example, Jason P. Abbott, Developmentalism and Dependenct in Southeast Asia: The Case of the Automotive Industry (London: Routledge Curzon, 2004); Phil Deans, “The Capitalist Developmental State in East Asia,” State Strategies in the Global Political Economy , ed. Ronen Palan and Jason Abbott (London: Cassell, 2000); Chalmers Johnson, MITI and the Japanese Economic Miracle: The Growth of Industrial Policy, 1925–1975 , 78–102 (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1982); and Robert Wade, Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of Government in East Asian Industrialization (Princeton, NJ: Princteon University Press, 1990). 85. Also referred to as newly industrializing countries or newly industrializing economies. 86. Abduhl Rahman Embong, Southeast Asian Middle Classes: Prospects for Social Change and Democratisation (Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: UKM ,2001). 87. Kok Wah Loh, “Developmentalism and the Limits of Democratic Discourse,” in Democracy in Malaysia: Discourses and Practices , ed. Kok Wah Loh and Khoo Boo Tiek (Richmond, V A: Curzon, 2003) 88. Embong, Southeast Asian Middle Classes, 99. 89. For example, in the 2000 Census, only 57,000 Chinese recorded their religion as Islam, out of a total population for Malaysia of 23.3 million. Malaysia’s current population is estimated atapproximately 27 million. See also Abbott and Gregorios-Pippas, “Islamization in Malaysia.” 90. Johan Saravanmuttu “Is There a Politics of the Malaysian Middle Class?” in Southest Asian Middle Classes: Prospects for Social Change and Democratisation , ed. Abduhl Rahman Embong, 103–19 (Selangor, Malaysia: Penerbit Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Press, 2001), 52. 91. Jason P. Abbott and Oliver Franks, “Malaysia at Fifty: Conﬂicting Deﬁnitions of Citizenship,” Asian Affairs 38, no. 3 (2007): 337–56. Language is a particularly contentious issue. Most recently, in March 2009, police used tear gas to break up a protest by Malay students against the teaching of science and math in English rather than in Bahasa Melayu, “Malaysian Police Fire Tear Gas atLanguage Protest,” Jakarta Post , March 7, 2009, http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2009/03/07/ malaysian-police-ﬁre-tear-gas-language-protest.html (accessed January 7, 2011). 92. By 1990, Malay/Bumiputera equity had risen to approximately 19 percent. 93. First with the NEP (1991–2001) and then in the National Vision Policy (2001–10).94. Abdul Rahman Embong, “Beyond the Crisis: The Paradox of the Malaysian Middle Class,” in Southest Asian Middle Classes: Prospects for Social Change and Democratisation , ed. Abduhl Rahman Embong, 80–102 (Selangor, Malaysia: Penerbit Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Press, 2001). Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 29 95. Ibid. 96. David Martin Jones and David Brown, “Singapore and the Myth of the Liberalizing Middle Class,” Paciﬁc Review 7, no. 1 (1994): 79–87. In their analysis of the middle class in Singapore, Jones and Brown refer to this behavior as kiasu , “afraid to lose.” See also Meredith Weiss, Protest and Possibilities: Civil Society and Coalitions for Political Change in Malaysia (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2006), 40, who argues that, although more complex, some of the same complacenceis seen in Malaysia. 97. This notwithstanding, some social scientists have reservations about the reliability of surveys done in Malaysia. 98. Ioannis Gatsiounis, “Abdullah Stirs a Hornets’ Nest,” Asia Times Online , October 2, 2004, http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast Asia/FJ02Ae05.html (accessed December 15, 2009). De- spite such criticism, there has been little serious attempt to overhaul the NEP. Since its inception, it has become almost a sacred cow within Malaysian politics, especially among more conservativeMalay-nationalist elements within UMNO and UMNO’s youth wing in particular (e.g., “‘Revive theNEP,’ Says Hishammuddin,” New Straits Times , July 21, 2005). This notwithstanding, Prime Minister Najib initially announced a major overhaul of the NEP within a month of assuming ofﬁce. However, when details of the New Economic Model were announced in March 2010, they were surprisinglyvague on both how and when preferential subsidies would be reduced. 99. For example, Lucian Pye, Asian Power and Politics (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1985); Daniel Bell, David Brown, Kanishka Jayasuriya, and David Martin Jones, “Towards a Model of IlliberalDemocracy,” in Towards Illiberal Democracy in Paciﬁc Asia, ed. Daniel Bell, David Brown, Kanishka Jayasuriya, and David Martin Jones, 163–67 (Hampshire, England: MacMillan, 1995); and Clark D. Neher, and Ross Marlay, Democracy and Development in Southeast Asia: The Winds of Change (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1995). 100. Kenneth Christie and Denny Roy, The Politics of Human Rights in East Asia (London: Pluto, 2001). 30 Asian Affairs: An American Review APPENDIX FIGURE A1. Mean government bias from February–March 2006 data sample forUtusan Malaysia . Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 31 FIGURE A2. Mean government bias from February–March 2008 data sample forUtusan Malaysia . 32 Asian Affairs: An American Review FIGURE A3. Mean government bias from February–March 2006 data sample forBerita Harian Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 33 FIGURE A4. Mean government bias from February–March 2008 data sample forBerita Harian . 34 Asian Affairs: An American Review FIGURE A5. Mean opposition bias from February–March 2008 data sample forUtusan Malaysia . Electoral Authoritarianism and Print Media in Malaysia 35 FIGURE A6. Mean opposition bias February–March 2008 data sample for Berita Harian . 36 Asian Affairs: An American Review TABLE A1. Main Actor in Article Berita Harian 2008 Sample Gov/ % Cumulative Actor opp Frequency % valid % 81 0 .20 .30 .3 Abdullah Badawi Gov 66 12 .81 7 .61 7 .8 Najib Tun Razak Gov 26 5 .06 .92 4 .7 Sami Vellu Gov 4 0 .81 .12 5 .8 Hishammudin Hussein Gov 17 3 .34 .53 0 .3 Anwar Ibrahim Opp 3 0 .60 .83 1 .1 Wan Azzizah Opp 2 0 .40 .53 1 .6 Mahathir Mohammad Gov (former) 3 0 .60 .83 2 .4 Lim Kit Siang Opp 3 0 .60 .83 3 .2 Lim Guan Eng Opp 3 0 .60 .83 4 .0 Nik Aziz Opp 6 1 .21 .63 5 .6 Hadi Awang Opp 8 1 .62 .13 7 .8 Barisan Nasional/UMNO campaign spokespersonGov 8 1 .62 .13 9 .9 Pakatan Rakyat spokespersonOpp 2 0 .40 .54 0 .4 PAS spokesperson Opp 1 0 .20 .34 0 .7 DAP spokesperson Opp 1 0 .20 .34 1 .0 National Barisan Nasional/UMNOofﬁceholderGov 92 17 .92 4 .56 5 .4 State Barisan/UMNO ofﬁceholderGov 67 13 .01 7 .88 3 .2 Other Barisan/UMNO ofﬁcialGov 31 6 .08 .29 1 .5 National Pakatan Rakyat ofﬁceholderOpp 4 0 .81 .19 2 .6 State Pakatan Rakyat ofﬁceholderOpp 5 1 .01 .39 3 .9 Other Pakatan Rakyat ofﬁceholderOpp 23 4 .56 .1 100 .0 Total 376 73 .0 100 .0 Notes .D A P =Democratic Action Party; Gov =government; Opp =opposition parties; PAS = Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party; UMNO =United Malays National Organization. TABLE A2. Descriptives for Merged 2008 Data Set 95% Conﬁdence Interval for M Lower Upper N M SD SE bound bound Minimum Maximum Actor evaluation in photo BH 54 2 .3148 .46880 .06380 2 .1869 2 .4428 2 .00 3 .00 UM 39 3 .2051 1 .17383 .18796 2 .8246 3 .5856 1 .00 8 .00 Total 93 2 .6882 .94384 .09787 2 .4938 2 .8826 1 .00 8 .00 Evaluation of actor in article BH 315 4 .2857 2 .12528 .11975 4 .0501 4 .5213 1 .00 21 .00 UM 171 3 .3801 2 .10363 .16087 3 .0626 3 .6977 1 .00 10 .00 Total 486 3 .9671 2 .15936 .09795 3 .7746 4 .1595 1 .00 21 .00 Reporter tone BH 113 1 .1416 .41976 .03949 1 .0634 1 .2198 1 .00 3 .00 UM 89 1 .5843 .87658 .09292 1 .3996 1 .7689 1 .00 3 .00 Total 202 1 .3366 .69507 .04891 1 .2402 1 .4331 1 .00 3 .00 Government bias BH 298 5 .3523 1 .06995 .06198 5 .2304 5 .4743 1 .00 7 .00 UM 236 5 .9619 1 .12733 .07338 5 .8173 6 .1064 1 .00 7 .00 Total 534 5 .6217 1 .13580 .04915 5 .5252 5 .7183 1 .00 7 .00 Opposition bias BH 265 2 .5585 1 .05770 .06497 2 .4306 2 .6864 1 .00 6 .00 UM 194 2 .0670 1 .23869 .08893 1 .8916 2 .2424 1 .00 7 .00 Total 459 2 .3508 1 .16211 .05424 2 .2442 2 .4574 1 .00 7 .00 Notes .BH=Berita Harian ;UM=Utusan Malaysia 37 38 Asian Affairs: An American Review TABLE A3. Analysis of Variance for Merged 2008 Data Set Variable Sum of squares df M square Fp Actor evaluation in photo Between groups 17 .950 1 17 .950 25 .520 .000 Within groups 64 .007 91 .703 Total 81 .957 92 Evaluation of actor in article Between groups 90 .895 1 90 .895 20 .268 .000 Within groups 2170 .578 484 4 .485 Total 2261 .473 485 Reporter tone Between groups 9 .756 1 9 .756 22 .338 .000 Within groups 87 .352 200 .437 Total 97 .109 201 Government bias Between groups 48 .928 1 48 .928 40 .757 .000 Within groups 638 .660 532 1 .200 Total 687 .588 533 Opposition bias Between groups 27 .055 1 27 .055 20 .904 .000 Within groups 591 .472 457 1 .294 Total 618 .527 458 Copyright of Asian Affairs: An American Review is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use. View publication stats