 Media / Political Bias    all text from rhetorica.net/bias.htm  Andrew R. Cline, Ph.D.     There is no such thing as an objective point of vie w     No matter how much we may try to ignore it, human communication always takes place  in a context, through a medium, and among individua ls and groups who are situated historically,  politically, economically, and socially. This state  of affairs is neither bad nor good. It simply is.  Bias is a small word that identifies the collective  influences of the entire context of a message.   Politicians are certainly biased and overtly so. T hey belong to parties and espouse  policies and ideologies. And while they may think t heir individual ideologies are simply common  sense, they understand that they speak from politic al positions.   Journalists, too, speak from political positions b ut usually not overtly so. The journalistic  ethics of objectivity and fairness are strong influ ences on the profession. But journalistic  objectivity is not the pristine objectivity of phil osophy. Instead, a journalist attempts to be  objective by two methods: 1) fairness to those conc erned with the news and 2) a professional  process of information gathering that seeks fairnes s, completeness, and accuracy. As we all  know, the ethical heights journalists set for thems elves are not always reached. But, all in all,  like politics, it is an honorable profession practi ced, for the most part, by people trying to do the  right thing.   The press is often thought of as a unified voice w ith a distinct bias (right or left  depending on the critic). This simplistic thinking fits the needs of ideological struggle, but is  hardly useful in coming to a better understanding o f what is happening in the world. I believe  journalism is an under-theorized practice. In other  words, journalists often do what they do  without reflecting upon the meaning of the premises  and assumptions that support their  practice. I say this as a former journalist. I thin k we may begin to reflect upon journalistic  practice by noticing that the press applies a narra tive structure to ambiguous events in order to  create a coherent and causal sense of events.   For citizens and information consumers (which are one in the same today), it is  important to develop the skill of detecting bias. R emember: Bias does not suggest that a  message is false or unfair.     Structural Bias as Theory     I have asserted that some critics of the press thi nk of it as speaking with a unified voice  with a distinct ideological bias. I have further as serted that this simplistic thinking fits the needs   of ideological struggle, but is hardly useful in co ming to a better understanding of what is  happening in the world. For that better understandi ng we need a theory.   A theory offers us a model that tells us why thing s happen as they do. Further, a theory  allows us to predict outcomes and behavior. Asserti ons of ideological bias do neither. While we  can expect the press to demonstrate ideological bia ses in regard to certain issues or other  localized phenomena, these and other behaviors are explained and predicted by the structural  biases. Since the press sometimes demonstrates a co nservative bias, asserting that the press  is liberal neither predicts nor explains. Since the  press sometimes demonstrates a liberal bias,  asserting that the press is conservative neither pr edicts nor explains.   Test this for yourself. Choose a situation that is  current--preferably breaking right now.  For each of the structural biases listed above, wri te down what you would expect the press to do  based on that bias. Then, complete the exercise wit h a concluding statement that takes into  account as many of the structural biases as possibl e. Now, follow the situation for a few days  and note how the press behaves. I think you will fi nd that you have successfully predicted press  behavior.    News media assumptions about language and discourse      Simply communicating by written or spoken words in troduces bias to the message. If, as  asserted earlier, there is no such thing as an obje ctive point of view, then there cannot be  objective or transparent language, i.e. a one-to-on e correspondence between reality and words  such that I may accurately represent reality so tha t you experience it as I do. Language  mediates our lived experiences. And our evaluation of those experiences are reflected in our  language use. Rhetoric scholar James A. Berlin once  said that language is "never innocent." By  this he meant that language cannot be neutral; it r eflects and structures our ideologies and  world views. To speak at all is to speak politicall y. The practice of journalism, however, accepts  a very different view of language that creates seri ous consequences for the news consumer.  Most journalists do their jobs with little or no th ought given to language theory, i.e. how  language works and how humans use language. Most jo urnalists, consciously or not, accept a  theory (metaphor) of language as a transparent cond uit along which word-ideas are easily sent  to a reader or viewer who then experiences reality as portrayed by the words.  From George Lakoff's Moral Politics  (U of Chicago P), journalism falsely  asserts that:    1. Concepts are literal and nonpartisan:  The standard six-question rubric of journalism  (who, what, when, where, why, how) cannot capture t he complexity of issues as seen  through, and expressed by, the incompatible moral s ystems of liberals and  conservatives.  2. Language use is neutral:  "Language is associated with a conceptual system. To use  the language of a moral or political conceptual sys tem is to use and to reinforce that  conceptual system."  3. News can be reported in neutral terms:  Not if #2 is correct. To choose a discourse is  to choose a position. To attempt neutrality confuse s the political concepts. Is it an  "inheritance tax" or a "death tax"? What could poss ibly be a neutral term? To use both in  the name of balance is confusing because most news articles don't have the space, and  most TV treatments don't have the time, to fully ex plain the terms and why liberals prefer  one and conservatives prefer the other. There's no time or space to explain why this  language difference matters (beyond political tacti cs) to the formation, implementation,  and evaluation of policy.  4. Mere use of language cannot put anyone at a disadva ntage:  Again, see #2.  5. All readers and viewers share the same conceptual s ystem: We share the same  English language, i.e. its grammar. We often do not  share dialects or the denotations  and connotations of concepts, lived experience, and  ideologies. The statement "I am a  patriotic American" means something entirely differ ent to liberals and conservatives.  That difference is more than a matter of connotatio n. The differences in connotation  spring from different moral constructs. What the co nservative means by that statement  appears immoral to the liberal and vice versa.     These false assumptions by journalists, rather tha n overt politicking, help create the  political bias news consumers often detect in news reporting. A conservative will quite naturally  assert a conservative world view by using concepts in ways comfortable to conservatives. The  same goes for liberals. It is often pointed out tha t most news reporters are Democrats or vote for  Democrats. Party affiliation, however, tells us not hing about political ideology and the moral  concepts that undergird it. There are conservative Democrats and liberal Republicans. Be that  as it may, the ethics of journalistic practice stro ngly urge reporters to adopt the assumptions  about language listed above and the structural bias es listed above. The ethics of journalistic  practice encourage journalists to adopt a (nonexist ent) neutral language to mitigate any effects  of ideological bias. There simply is no concerted o r sustained effort to slant the news for political  purposes by mainstream news outlets.    all text from rhetorica.net/bias.htm  