 1353The rich history of war provides evidence of  its devastating consequences and of the wide  variety of circumstances that lead to it. While  there is much that we know about wars, there is  still much to be learned about how the choice to  go to war differs across countries and circum ­ stances, and in particular how this relates to the  interplay between economic circumstances and  political regimes. Although religious and ethnic  conflicts have played key roles in many wars,  balance of power, territorial disputes, expan ­ sion of territory, and access to key resources or  wealth are often either involved or the primary  driving force behind wars. In this paper, we   See, for example, Geoffrey Blainey ( 973) and David  Kaiser ( 990).  Resources and wealth are the focus of much of the  recent formal literature on war, as discussed below.  Moreover, materialistic motivations have been identified  as primary source of wars in the history of empires (see,  for example, William V. Harris 979 and Ronald Findlay  996), and some scholars argue that modernization has Political Bias and War By Matthew O. Jackson and Massimo Morelli * We examine how countries’ incentives to go to war depend on the “political bias”  of their pivotal decision makers. This bias is measured by a decision maker’s risk/ reward ratio from a war compared to that of the country at large. If there is no  political bias, then there are mutually acceptable transfers from one country to  the other that will avoid a war in the presence of commitment or enforceability of  peace treaties. There are cases with a strong enough bias on the part of one or both  countries where war cannot be prevented by any transfer payments. Our results  shed some new light on the uneven contender paradox and the interpretation of the  “democratic peace.” We examine countries’ choices of the bias of their leaders and  show that when transfers are possible, at least one country will choose a biased  leader, as that leads to a strong bargaining position and extraction of transfers.   (JEL D7, D74) build a model that serves as a basis for under ­ standing how political structure (crudely mod ­ eled) interacts with economic incentives to  determine when wars occur. Our model of war is described as follows.  Two countries are faced with a possible war, and  each knows their respective probability of win ­ ning, which depends on their respective wealth  levels. If a war ensues, each country incurs a  cost and then the victor claims a portion of the  loser’s wealth. The incentives of each country  thus depend on the costs, the potential spoils,  and the probability that each will win. If either  country wishes to go to war, then war ensues.  Countries can offer to give (or receive) a transfer  in order to avoid a war. The way in which we tie the analysis back  to political structure is crude but powerful.   We model a country’s decisions through the  eyes of the pivotal decision maker in the   society. For instance, this could be an executive,  a monarch, the median member of an oligarchy,  or the median voter, depending on the political  regime. The ratio of share of benefits from war  further increased the profitability of conquest (see Peter Liberman 993, who discusses Hitler’s exploitation of occu ­ pied territories during World War II). A recent example of  a war related to materialistic expansion motivations is the invasion of Kuwait in 990. We stress that by materialistic  motivations we include power and control motivations of  country leaders, and hence our arguments apply even when  no territory or resource is a cause of war.* Jackson: Department of Economics, Stanford Univer­ sity, Stanford, CA 94305 (e ­mail: jacksonm@stanford.edu);   Morelli: Department of Economics and Department of  Political Science, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43 0 (e­mail: morelli. 0@osu.edu). We are grateful  for financial support from the National Science Founda­tion under grants SES ­036493 and SES ­05905, the  Guggenheim Foundation, and the Center for Advanced  Studies in Behavioral Sciences. We thank M. Battaglini,   V. Crawford, J. Eguia, J. Fearon, G. Gatta, D. Jankowski,   T. Kim, L. Mathevet, R. Powell, E. Rasmusen, G. Tabellini,  D. Verdier, C. Volden, L. Zambernardi, and three anony ­ mous referees for helpful comments, and participants at  seminars for useful feedback. SEPTEMBER 2007 1354 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW compared to share of costs for this pivotal agent  is thus a critical determinant of a country’s deci ­ sions. We call this ratio “political bias.” If it is  close to one, then the country’s critical decision  maker’s relative benefits/costs are similar to the  country at large. If this ratio is greater than one,  then we say that the country leader has a “posi ­ tive bias.” An unbiased leader is “representa ­ tive” of the interests of the country, in the sense  that he or she sees the same relative benefits  and costs from a war as the country does as a  whole. Hence, absence of bias may be seen as an  operationalization of a representativeness prop ­ erty associated with the level of democracy of a  political regime.3 Political bias essentially embodies anything  that might lead to different incentives for the  critical decision maker relative to the society as a  whole. For instance, in an authoritarian regime,  it may be that a leader can keep a disproportion ­ ate share of the gains from a war. It may also  be that the leader sees other gains from war, in  personal recognition or power. Similarly, if the  military is leading a country, then it may be that  military leaders gain disproportionately from  war in terms of accumulated power, or even in  keeping their troops occupied. These effects are  not unique to autocratic or oligarchic regimes,  but can also occur in democracies.4 Sometimes  a leader knows that (s)he is more easily reelected  if the country is at war at the time of the elec ­ tions, or may have other indirect benefits in  terms of benefiting friends or companies to  which he or she has ties. It is also important to  note that bias can also go in the other direction.  For instance, if a democratic leader risks losing  office if a war is lost, then that might lead him  or her to overweight the costs of war relative to  3 To the extent that a democracy is embodied by the  median voter, this then embodies the relative distribution of  the costs and benefits of a war across the population, where  things like relative tax rates can be influential. 4 An argument in favor of the hypothesis that democra ­ cies tend to be less biased can be found in David A. Lake  (99): “State rent seeking creates an imperialist bias in a  country’s foreign policy. This bias is smallest in democra ­ cies, where the costs to society of controlling the State are  relatively low, and greatest in autocracies, where the costs  are higher.”gains, resulting in a bias factor of less than one.5, 6   In general, political bias reflects the different  cost/benefit calculation of the agent (the leader  or pivotal decision maker in the government)  who bargains on behalf of the principal (the  country). This agency problem can determine  conflict, even when countries have accurate  intelligence about each other’s military capa ­ bilities, and even when they have the power to  bargain and make transfers to avoid a war. We show that if both countries have unbiased  leaders, then war can be avoided, provided the  countries can make transfers and provided they  can commit to peace conditional on receiving  transfers. If either country has a leader with  positive bias, however, then war can ensue, and  whether it does depends on the specifics of the  war technology, relative wealth, potential costs  and spoils of war, and the size of the biases. We  also study such bargaining when neither country  can commit to peace after receiving transfers.7  In that case, the incentives are more compli ­ cated, as it must be that after receiving a trans ­ fer, a war would no longer be worthwhile for the  potential aggressor. When peace treaties are not  5 For an analysis of the political costs of war for differ ­ ent regimes, see Bruce Bueno de Mesquita and Randolph M. Siverson ( 995) and Giacomo Chiozza and Hein E.  Goemans ( 004) . 6 See George W. Downs and David M. Rocke ( 994)  and Ahmer Tarar ( 006) for different discussions of the  incentives of an executive to engage in war relative to the  electorate’s incentives to retain the executive. 7 This commitment problem is usually studied in  dynamic models. For example, in Michael A. Schwarz and Konstantin Sonin ( 004) war can be avoided with a contin ­ uous stream of transfers that comes at a fast enough rate to  always have the aggressor wish to delay rather than attack. Along similar lines, James Fearon ( 996) shows that as  long as commitment not to go to war after receiving a trans ­ fer exists for one period, the long ­run commitment can be  brought back in, through an appropriate dynamic mecha ­ nism. In our no ­commitment model, a transfer doesn’t bind  the actions of the receiver for any length of time, and hence  those results do not apply.  Given that the attention of empirical studies and his ­ torians has largely been on wars and armed conflicts that  actually occurred, it is difficult to find direct empirical  evidence of transfers that avoided a war, for the obvious  counterfactual reasons. Nevertheless, one can certainly  see the role of transfers in many epochs. By transfers we  do not refer to explicit monetary transfers only; we refer  also to transfers of territory, control over seas, and even  implicit transfers of wealth and control linked to the mar ­ riages between royal families across Europe up to the end  of the nineteenth century. In the eighteenth and nineteenth  VOL. 97 NO. 4 1355 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR  enforceable, even two countries with unbiased  leaders (or, in short, unbiased countries) may go  to war, depending on the sensitivity of the prob ­ ability of winning to the difference in power. Our model suggests some novel considerations  regarding the so ­called “Democratic Peace” (or  “Liberal Peace”) observation, where two democ ­ racies are much less likely to go to war with  each other than are two countries when at least  one is not a democracy (see, e.g., Michael W.  Doyle 96 and Bruce Russett 993). We show  that, at most, one of two unbiased countries will  want to go to war, and if binding treaties can be  written, then two unbiased countries can always  reach an agreement over transfers that will avoid  a war. We can call this unbiased peace , and it  can be interpreted as a new explanation of the  democratic peace observation under the hypoth ­ esis that democracies tend to be less biased than  nondemocratic regimes.9 Wars between democ ­ racies are avoided not due to similarity of norms  or cultural affinities, but due to a lack of politi ­ cal bias in the bargaining process (determined  perhaps by the system of checks and balances  typical of a democracy). Our model does predict  that two politically biased  democracies could  still go to war with each other if they are each  sufficiently biased. Thus, mutual democracy is  neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for  peace. centuries there was an explicit system of compensations  among European great powers: the first ( 77) and the third  (795) partition of Poland, the Franco ­British and Russo ­ British negotiations prior to the formation of the Entente  Cordiale, as well as the resolutions of the Near Eastern crises of 75–77 and 5– . Trade concessions or  replacements of ministers could be indirect forms of trans ­ fers to the threatening power as well. The most important principle in UN Security Council resolution 4 was “land  for peace,” and such a principle was used as the basis for Israel’s peace treaty with Egypt in 979, and was at the cen ­ ter of the Oslo Accords with the PLO. Another example  is the provision of iron and logistical support by Sweden  to Hitler in World War II. A notable example of failure of  appeasement due to a lack of commitment is the Munich Agreement of  93. 9 The idea that incentives of aristocrats to go to war  might differ from those of democratic leaders is not new, and is well articulated in Immanuel Kant ( 795). The nov ­ elty here is in explicitly modeling bias in a model where  we can understand its role in bargaining to avoid war, and  its interaction with commitment and the technology of war,  as well as a country’s incentives to select its leaders and  their bias.Using political bias as the key driver of war,  and assuming a negative correlation between  political bias and the level of democracy, our  model provides an explanation of the stylized  fact that democracies tend to win wars against  autocracies: ceteris paribus , more biased lead ­ ers are willing to enter conflicts that they have a  lower probability of winning (see David A. Lake  99 for a related argument). Another stylized  fact (see Clifton Morgan and Sally H. Campbell 99) that our model can explain relates to the  effect of the size of a democracy on its incentives  to go to war versus bargaining, depending on the  sensitivity of the probability of winning to the  difference in wealth between contenders.0 Another phenomenon on which our model can  shed light is the so ­called uneven contenders   paradox , first discussed by Carl von Clausewitz  (3), which refers to situations in which one  small or weak country doesn’t concede or is the  initiator of conflict, even though it expects losses  from a war. In our model, the weaker country can  in fact be the aggressor because of the leader’s  bias and/or because the probability of winning,  or war technology , is not very sensitive to the  difference in power between the contenders. In  other words, “who attacks whom” depends not  only on relative wealths but, crucially, also on  their relative bias and on the technology of war. The sensitivity of war technology is shown to  be one of the key determinants of the incentives  to form coalitions as well: when the war tech ­ nology is not too sensitive to power differences,  there are no incentives to form alliances, defen ­ sive or offensive, whereas when the war technol ­ ogy is very sensitive, there can be incentives to  form offensive alliances and/or defensive alli ­ ances, depending on the distribution of wealth.  0 Given that the model aims to isolate and highlight the  effect of bias and does not include other important domes ­ tic characteristics of different political regimes, there are  other observations on democratic peace (see, e.g., Bueno  De Mesquita et al. 999) that cannot be explained with  our simple model. For example, since we do not analyze  strategic timing issues, the model cannot explain why  democracies seem to be more likely to initiate wars against  autocracies than vice versa.  Jack Hirshleifer ( 99) was the first to call the prob ­ ability of winning in a contest the “technology of conflict.”   We believe this terminology is appropriate since the sen ­ sitivity of the probability of winning to the relative posi ­ tions of the contenders is mostly influenced by military  technology. SEPTEMBER 2007 1356 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW A strong form of stability, where no group of  countries could gain by reorganizing them ­ selves into new alliances, will generally not be  attainable in this case of sensitive war technol ­ ogy. This is related to issues of empty ­cores in  a variety of coalitional games with some sort  of competition. In settings where core ­stability  fails, it makes sense to explore weaker forms of  stability. We show that it is possible to sustain  large alliances of countries. We also examine the incentives of citizens  to (s)elect leaders of different biases. In the  absence of transfers, a country would prefer  to have an unbiased leader. On the other hand,  when transfers are available, a country may  benefit from having a biased leader who extracts  transfers from other countries, provided the bias  is not so strong to lead the country into unde ­ sired wars. Examining equilibrium choices of  bias of two countries, we see that at least one  country chooses a biased leader and there can  be multiple such equilibria. Once we introduce  uncertainty regarding the opponent’s wealth and  power at the time of the choice of leaders, war  can occur in equilibrium. To clarify the connection of this paper with  the existing rational choice literature in interna ­ tional relations, note that in any “realist” frame ­ work (a term due to von Clausewitz 3), war is  based on practical cost/benefit calculations and  with full knowledge of circumstances. As an  example of rational realist model, Bruce Bueno de Mesquita ( 9) studies war as based on cost/ benefit calculations by countries (interpreted as  unitary actors). In such models, if one allows  for bargaining and transfers, war should not be  possible, whereas in our model the agency prob ­ lem identified by the presence of political bias  breaks the unitary actor assumption and allows  for novel explanations of war.  Another possibility is to appeal to such other predic ­ tions about outcomes as von Neumann–Morgenstern stable  sets, as in James Jordan ( 006), who studies pillage games  (those are coalitional games in which a coalition with more  wealth than another can make the other surrender all or part  of its wealth at no cost). Pillage is clearly related to war, but  differs in that it is costless and the outcome is certain (the  stronger takes from the weaker). See also Michel Piccione and Ariel Rubinstein ( 004), who examine distributions of  resources across countries so that no country has any incen ­ tive to take from another, where stronger countries can take  costlessly and at will from weaker countries.Bueno de Mesquita et al. ( 003) analyze the  variation across countries in terms of the nec ­ essary support for a leader within the so ­called  “selectorate.” In their model, democratic lead ­ ers need a larger coalition to support them rela ­ tive to nondemocratic leaders. Keeping a larger  coalition satisfied is more costly, and hence  losing a war is relatively more costly for demo ­ cratic leaders, and generally makes them less  prone to war. Thus, beside the fact that Bueno  de Mesquita et al. ( 003) do not analyze trans ­ fers, their theory is based on a political leader  maintaining an “internal” base, while ours is a  complementary theory that focuses on political  bias with respect to “external” bargaining. In our model it is possible for two countries to  go to war even though they both have complete  information about the relative likelihood of win ­ ning, and despite the fact that they could bargain  and make payments to avoid war and that war  burns resources. This is related to the “Hicks  Paradox” from the bargaining literature which  ponders the occurrence of strikes and failed bar ­ gaining in general contexts. Since our model of  war operates under complete information, it is  complementary to models based on asymmetric  information and differences in beliefs.3 Other  complementary potential causes of war identi ­ fied in the literature include the presence of indi ­ visibilities in bargaining (see Jonathan Kirshner 000), strategic timing considerations (summa ­ rized, e.g., in James Fearon 995), and “spiral  theories” of war (see, e.g., Kenneth Waltz 959,  Thomas A. Schelling 963, Robert Jervis 976,  97, and, more recently, Sandeep Baliga and  Tomas Sjöström 004). In John F. Nash ( 953),  Schelling ( 966), and Vincent P. Crawford  (9), bargaining can break down because of  excessive demands or excessive commitments  to fight made during the bargaining process,  whereas in our model bargaining would not  break down if the biases are not too high. Thus,  in our model the source of ex post conflict is in  3 Explanations of wars based on miscalculations or  errors due to lack of information or to different priors about  relative power have been discussed by Blainey ( 973), Erik  A. Gartzke ( 999), and R. Harrison Wagner ( 000), among  others. As argued by Fearon ( 995, 997), once we allow  for bargaining and communication, these explanations are  consistent if there are strategic incentives to hide (or not to  reveal) information or problems with signalling. VOL. 97 NO. 4 1357 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR the excessively aggressive agents chosen by the  principal selectorates. The source of bargaining  failure in our model is therefore more closely  related to delegation games (Chaim Fershtman  and Kenneth L. Judd 97) such as that of  Stephen R. G. Jones ( 99), where there is an  explicit combination of agency and bargaining  problems.4 I.  A Materialistic Model of War We first focus on a potential war between two  countries in complete isolation. We denote the  countries by i and j. We return to the case of  more countries below. Let wi denote the total wealth  of country i. We model the technology of war in a sim ­ ple way. If countries i and j go to war against  each other, country i prevails with probability  pi1wi, wj2, which is nondecreasing in wi and  nonincreasing in wj.5 When the wealth levels  are clear, we let pij denote pi1wi, wj2. The prob ­ ability that country i prevails is pji 5  2 pij.  This simple form ignores the possibility of a  stalemate or any gradation of outcome, but still  captures the essence of war necessary to under ­ stand the incentives to go to war. Note that it  is possible that pi1wi, wj2 Z 1/2 when wi 5 wj.  This allows i, for instance, to have some geo ­ graphic, population, or technological advantage  or disadvantage. In terms of the consequences of a war, we   model the costs and benefits as follows.  Regardless of winning or losing, a war costs  a  country a fraction C . 0 of its wealth. If a coun ­ try wins, then it gains  a fraction G . 0 of the  other country’s wealth.6 So, after a war against  country j, country i’s wealth is wi1 2 C 2 G2  4 In contrast to our model, however, in Jones ( 99) the  choice of agents by the two principals in the first stage does  not affect the disagreement point or possible agreements of  the second ­stage bargaining problem. In our model, the dis ­ agreement utility (war payoffs) and the potential transfers  are affected by the biases, and so by choosing the biases the  countries are changing the key elements of the subsequent  bargaining game. 5 For empirical support of the hypothesis that the prob ­ ability of winning depends on the relative wealth levels  (supposing that relative wealth levels determine relative levels of war mobilization), see Mark Harrison ( 005) and  Charles Tilly ( 99). 6 We could also add fixed costs and/or benefits.  However, adding such parameters would add little to the if it loses and wi1 2 C2 1 Gwj if it wins. We  let C 1 G # , so that at most the full wealth of  a country can be lost to the cost of war and the  other country. When two countries meet, they each decide  whether to go to war, and if either decides to go  to war then a war occurs. As part of the deci ­ sion process they may be able to make trans ­ fers of resources or territory, or to make other  concessions. Let aj denote the fraction of wj controlled by  the agent who is pivotal in the decisions of coun ­ try j. The fraction of the spoils of war that the  pivotal agent might control can differ from the  fraction of the wealth that they hold, especially  in nondemocratic regimes or in situations where  there might be other sorts of benefits from war  (for instance, to a pivotal military leader). The  fraction of the spoils of war obtained by the  pivotal agent is a9j. Thus, in the absence of any  transfers, the pivotal agent of a country j wishes  to go to war if and only if 7 ()  112C2ajwj2112pji2Gajwj 1 pjiGa9jwi     . ajwj, where the left ­hand side is the expected value  of a war and the right ­hand side is the expected  value of not going to war. We can rewrite this so that the expected gains  are on the left ­hand side and the expected losses  are on the right ­hand side: ()  pjiGa9jwi . 3C1112pji2G4ajwj. A. Political Bias Let Bj 5 a9j /aj denote the ratio of the per ­ centage that the pivotal decision ­making agent  qualitative analysis of the interaction of political bias and  war incentives. 7 We examine this as if the other country were choosing  not to go to war. Although this could turn out to be a hypo ­ thetical comparison, it is still the relevant one, as the equi ­ librium outcome (in the absence of transfers) would be that  the countries end up going to war if and only if the inequal ­ ity holds for at least one of the two countries’ leaders. SEPTEMBER 2007 1358 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW stands to gain versus what he or she has at risk.  We call this the  political bias  of country j. It is important to emphasize that although we  model the relative gains and losses as being pro ­ portional to wealth, the critical aspect of politi ­ cal bias in our model is that there is a difference  between the incentives of the pivotal decision  maker and the country as a whole. This might,  more generally, include things like potential  power that a military leader or politician might  gain from winning a war, which would bias  them away from considering the pure costs and  gains from war and can effectively be viewed  as a distorted view of gains 1a9j . aj2. We also  note that bias could similarly be less than . It  could be, for instance, that a politician fears los ­ ing office due to a lost war, and this could mani ­ fest itself in having the politician overweight the  losses of a war. We can rewrite ( ) as: (3)  Bj pjiGwi . 3C1112pji2G4wj. This inequality, where the left ­hand side is  the normalized expected gains (having divided  by aj ) and the right ­hand side is the normalized  expected costs, makes the role of the bias quite  clear. If Bj . , then the leader overweights  potential gains (since in this case the rest of the  country has a ratio at stake 1 2 a9j2/1 2 aj2  , ); while if it is less than , it underweights  potential gains. We note some intuitive comparative statics. The “tendency” of j to want to go to war  (as measured in the range of parameter values  where j wants to go to war): • Is increasing in Bj and G, and decreasing in  C; • Depends only on the ratio of C/G and not on  the absolute levels of either C or G: and • Depends only on Bj and not on the absolute  levels of either aj or a9j. These show the intuitive comparative statics  that a larger bias makes a country more prone to  war, as does an increase in the ratio of benefits to  costs of war. The effects of the wealth levels, wi  and wj, are ambiguous, as they enter through pji,  as well as directly. For instance, as wi increases,  the potential spoils from war increase, but the  probability of winning for j decreases. Which of these two effects dominates depends on the  technology of war. Given this dependence on the technology,  for the purposes of illustration it is useful to  carry several examples of winning probabilities  throughout. Example  1. Proportional Probability of Wi nning:   We say that the probability of winning is pro ­ portional (to relative wealths) if pji 5 wj /1wj 1  wi2. In this case, (3) can be rewritten as (4)  1Bj212Gwi wi1wj . C. REMARK : Under a proportional probability  of winning, a politically unbiased country never  wishes to go to war. If Bj . , then the tendency  for j to want to go to war is increasing in wi and  decreasing in wj. Example  2. Fixed Probability of Winning:  We say  that the probability of winning a war is fixed if  pji 5 1/2, regardless of wealth levels. This is an  extreme case of situations in which wealth has  no impact on the probability of winning a war. In that case, (3) can be rewritten as (5)  Bjwi wj . 112C G. Here, an unbiased country could want to go to  war, but only if its wealth is low compared to the  other country. In general, in this case a country’s  tendency to want to go to war is higher if it has  relatively less wealth. Example  3. Higher Wealth Wins:  We say that the   higher wealth wins if pji 5  when wj . wi,   pji 5 0 when wj , wi, and pji 5 1/2 when wj 5 wi.  This is another extreme case that captures situa ­ tions in which wealth is the critical determinant  of the probability of winning a war. In this case, a country j wishes to go to war  (in the absence of transfers) whenever wj . wi  and gains outweigh losses, BjGwi . Cwj. When  wealths are equal, the expected gains ­versus ­ losses condition is as in the fixed case. VOL. 97 NO. 4 1359 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR Example  and Example 3 will also be referred  to, respectively, as the extremely insensitive and  extremely sensitive war technologies. II.  The Interplay between Political Bias    and Transfers We begin with the important benchmark  where no transfers are possible. A. War Incentives in the Absence   of Transfers When two countries meet, it could be that nei ­ ther country wishes to go to war, just one coun ­ try wishes to go to war, or both countries wish to  go to war. If neither wishes it, then clearly there  is no war, and transfers would be irrelevant. If  both countries wish war, then there is a war and  no transfers could possibly avoid it. The only  situation where one country might be willing to  make transfers that could induce the other coun ­ try to avoid a war comes when only one country  has an interest in engaging in war. Let us first  make some observations regarding the param ­ eters that lead to the various possible scenarios,  and then come back to focus on transfers. PROPOSITION  (No Transfers):  Consider any  fixed wi, wj, and pij.  (i) If Bi 5 Bj 5 , then at most one country  wishes to go to war regardless of the other  parameters.  (ii) Fixing any ratio C/G, if Bi and Bj are both  sufficiently large, then both countries wish  to go to war.  (iii) Fixing any Bi and Bj, if C/G is large enough,  then neither country wishes to go to war. PROOF:  See the Appendix. For fixed biases Bi . , Bj . , and a fixed  ratio C/G, whether or not one or both countries  wish to go to war depends on the technology  pi1 · , · 2 and the wealth levels in ways that may  not be purely monotone.B. Transfers to Avoid a War:   The Commitment Case We now consider situations where in the  absence of any transfers one country would like  to go to war but the other would not, and charac ­ terize when it is that transfers avoid a war. We start with the case where countries can  commit to peace conditional on the transfer.  This is a situation where the countries can sign  some (internationally) enforceable treaty so  that they will not go to war conditional on the  transfer. In the absence of such enforceability or  commitment, it could be that i makes the trans ­ fer to j and then j invades anyway. We deal with  the case of no commitment in the next section. Commitment could come from international  organizations to the extent that they have threats  and promises to help enforce peace agreements  (e.g., the United Nations), or, alternatively, from  longer ­term reputation effects. If a country is to  face a number of countries over time, then by  abiding by its promises it will earn future trans ­ fers, while otherwise it will end up fighting a  series of wars. Clearly, if transfers are prefer ­ able to war in each case, then the country would  prefer to have a series of transfers to a series of  wars. When transfers are made from country i to  country j, we assume that the decision maker in  country j gets a9j of the transfer, and the decision  maker in country i loses ai of the transfer. Thus,  decision makers’ biases toward transfers are the  same as those toward gains and losses from war.  This is not critical to any of the results, as it is  important only that a bias be present somewhere.  We make this assumption to be consistent with  gains and losses.9 The aim is to identify when it is that transfers  will avoid  a war. That is, we would like to know  when is it that:  We note that the commitment case also embodies no  change in leaders (or their biases) over time, or at least some  continuity in their incentives. To the extent that democracies  change leaders frequently, one can at least imagine there  being a problem of a new leader abiding by old agreements.  However, that can be alleviated by reputation effects. 9 For instance, our results still hold qualitatively (with  some differences in the exact equations), if we assume that  decision makers evaluate all transfers (in or out) at a rate of  aj (or all at a9j). SEPTEMBER 2007 1360 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW • In the absence of transfers, j wants to go to  war with i; • i prefers to pay tij . 0 to j rather than going to  war; and • j would prefer to have peace and the transfer  tij to going to war. It is important to note that when we say that  transfers avoid a war, we are imposing the con ­ straint that a war would have occurred in the  absence of any transfers. As we show in the Appendix, the following  condition characterizes the situations where  transfers avoid a war: (6)  pjia11Bjwi wjb21 . C G .    112pji21Bi Bj212 a11Bj wi wjb , The left ­hand side corresponds to country j  wanting to go to war in the absence of any  transfers, while the right ­hand side corresponds  to the willingness of i to make a transfer that  would induce j to no longer want to go to war.  Based on this set of inequalities, we conclude  the following. PROPOSITION : Consider a case where j  wishes to go to war (in the absence of any trans - fers) while i does not. Holding all else equal,  the range of relative costs to gains, C/G, where  a transfer can be made that will avoid a war,  increases (in the sense of set inclusion) when•  Bi decreases, • pji increases, and • wi  /wj increases (holding pji fixed).0 PROOF:  See the Appendix. The proposition is fairly intuitive. Reducing  Bi makes i less likely to want to go to war, and  to gain less from a war, and hence willing to  0 If we do not hold pji fixed, then things are ambiguous,  as larger relative wealth makes i better able to pay, but also  better able to win.make larger transfers to avoid it. Increasing pji  or wi  /wj (holding pji fixed) has the same effect,  and also increases the range where j would like  to go to war in the absence of any transfers. So,  for instance, a technological change that exog ­ enously favors one country in a war (an increase  in pji ) makes transfers more likely to avoid war,  especially when the challenger is more politi ­ cally biased and/or poorer. It is important to  note that it need not be the wealthier country  that is the challenger. A poor but politically  biased country can extract transfers. The effect of the political bias of the potential  attacking country j, Bj, is ambiguous. It makes  country j more aggressive, but also leads i to be  willing to make larger transfers. Which effect  dominates depends on a variety of factors. To illustrate the proposition, we consider the  extreme benchmark cases. In the benchmark  case where pji 5 1/2 regardless of wealth levels  (Example ), (6) implies that there exists a range  of values of C/G such that transfers help avoid  war if and only if  Bi , Bj awi wjb2 . So in this case it is very clear that transfers help  the most when Bi is small, Bj is large, and/or  wi  /wj is large. These correspond to situations  where the transferring country is less biased,  the aggressor is more biased, and the wealth at  risk for the transferring country relative to the  aggressor is larger. In the other extreme case  where the higher wealth wins (Example 3), and  when j has a relative wealth advantage, (6) sim ­ plifies to  Bj wi wj . C G . 0. Here, war is again “more avoidable” with larger  bias Bj and larger wi  /wj (which leads to larger   Note that this description is consistent with some  interpretations of the behavior of the dictator of North  Korea (even though there is also a security concern): the  biased leader of a poor country with access to a potential  jump in the probability of winning a war with a neighbor  may obtain transfers from other countries. Such transfers  may depend on whether commitment problems can be over ­ come, something that we come back to below. VOL. 97 NO. 4 1361 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR relative transfers), but now Bi is irrelevant as i  is sure to lose. In the case of two unbiased countries, we  obtain the following result. PROPOSITION 3 (Unbiased Peace):  Two unbi - ased countries 1Bi 5 Bj 5 2 will never go to war  if they can make transfers to each other and the  receiver of a transfer can commit not to go to  war after receiving the transfer. PROOF:  See the Appendix. The result is easy to understand. War imposes  costs, and so when bargaining is unbiased, the  total pie from avoiding a war is larger than the  total pie from going to war. Thus, transfers avoid  a war. The formal proof comes from noting  that the right ­hand side of (6) becomes 0 when  Bi 5 Bj 5 , so one country is always willing  to buy the other off. Thus, either war is avoided  because neither wanted it in the first place, or  because one country is willing to pay the other  off (recalling that at most one unbiased country  ever wants to go to war). Proposition 3 identifies a new explanation for  the observation that democracies rarely go to war  with one another. Most of the explanations of  this fact in the literature concern internal checks  and balances within a democracy, or the cultural  norms and relative affinities that one democracy  has for another. Here we point out that two unbi ­ ased countries (and hence two democracies to  the extent that they have smaller biases than  dictatorships, at least on average) never go to  war because they can always find some transfer  (perhaps bargaining under the threat of war) that  makes it irrational to go to war. It is important to note that this conclusion is  true only for two politically unbiased countries  and is not true if either country is politically  biased. Also, this further makes the point that it  is not democracy  that is the key determinant of  peace, but absence of political bias . C. The No-Commitment Case Let us now consider situations where a coun ­ try cannot commit to avoid a war if it receives  transfers. As discussed above, commitment is related to a number of factors: the presence or  lack of international organizations that have the  ability and incentives to enforce agreements,  the patience of the challenger, the likelihood  of meeting other countries in the future from  which the challenger might gain from having  maintained a reputation for abiding by its agree ­ ments, etc. So, a lack of commitment power can  stem from an absence of such institutions or  dynamic incentives. In the no ­commitment case, in order to avoid  a war, not only does a transfer have to be such  that the potential aggressor is willing to forego  the current opportunity for a war, but it also  needs to be such that after the transfer has been  made a war is no longer in the aggressor’s inter ­ est. Transfers do three things: • They make the target poorer and less  appealing; • They make the challenger richer, with more  to lose; and • They increase the probability that the chal ­ lenger will win. Here, we can see that there are countervail ­ ing effects. If the probability is not affected too  much by a transfer, then it is possible for trans ­ fers to avoid a war, as transfers can change the  wealth of the two countries so as to make it no  longer in one country’s interest to invade the  other. There are a number of things that we observe  about the no ­commitment case. First, we can  show that the situations where war is avoided due  to transfers in the case of no commitment are a  strict subset of those when there is commitment.  In both cases, the transfers that the potential  target country is willing to make are the same.  The only differences are from the challenger’s  perspective. The difference between the two   This contrasts with a model by Fearon ( 996), where  a country can avoid a war by buying the other country off  over time, and war never occurs. However, in Fearon’s  model, by accepting an offer today the other side commits  to waiting a period before attacking. That is, they cannot  simply take the transfer and then fight immediately. Then  the next period they can bargain again, and so forth. So, a  small amount of commitment (to delay a period) allows the  full impact commitment back in. In our model, we require  that immediately after the transfer is made a country not  want to turn around and attack. SEPTEMBER 2007 1362 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW cases is that in the commitment case, a potential  aggressor compares the value of no war (their  wealth plus any transfers) to what they would  gain from a war in the absence of any transfers;  while in the no ­commitment case a potential  aggressor compares the value of no war (again,  their wealth plus any transfers) to what they  would gain from a war after transfers have been  made. The value of a war to an aggressor after it  has received transfers is strictly higher than the  value of a war before any transfers, as the prob ­ ability of winning is weakly higher and, in the  case where transfers have already been made,  the aggressor gets to keep a portion of those  transfers regardless of whether it wins or loses,  while in the other case they get that wealth only  if they win. Next, the no ­commitment case has the fol ­ lowing interesting feature. There are situations  in which some transfers, tij . 0, would not avoid  a war, yet there are lower transfers, t9ij , where  tij . t9ij . 0, which would avoid a war. Thus, it  is possible that too high a transfer will lead to  war while a lower transfer will avoid a war. This  can be true in a case where the changes in trans ­ fers lead to substantial enough differences in  the probability that the challenger wins the war.  Larger transfers can lead the country making  the transfers to be more vulnerable in terms of  being more likely to lose a war, and thus higher  transfers can end up leading to a war that lower  transfers might have averted. This is illustrated  in the following example. First, we note that a transfer tij from country i  to j creates a situation in which j does not want  to go to war after having received the transfer in the case of no commitment, if  3 (7)  p9ji BjG1wi 2 tij2     # 1C 1 1 2 p9ji2G21wj 1 Bj tij2, where p9ji 5 pji1wj 1 tij, wi 2 tij2. Example  4. Smaller Transfers Avoid a War:  Let  Bi 5 , Bj 5 4, wi 5 wj 5 00, C 5 ⁄0, G 5  ⁄0, and pij1w, w2 5 1/2. 3 This is simply a rewriting of (3) where i’s wealth is   wi 2 tij, and where j’s wealth from the biased decision  maker’s perspective is wj 1 Bj tij , but enters into the war  technology as wj 1 tij.Note that in this case (3) is satisfied, so ini ­ tially j wishes to go to war with i. We estimate (see ( 4) in the Appendix) that  i would be willing to make a maximal transfer  of t¯ij 5 0 to avoid war. In the case of commit ­ ment, we can then check that this would avoid war (see ( ) in the appendix, which is then  satisfied). Suppose that pji10, 902 5 3/4. Thus, if a trans ­ fer of t¯ij 5 0 is made, then j would still wish to  go to war after the transfer, as (7) is not satisfied,  and so the transfer would not avoid a war. Consider, however, a smaller transfer of t 5 .  Suppose that pji10, 92 5 1/2 1 e. For small  enough e, (7) is satisfied and so this smaller t  avoids a war. While the specific numbers in the example  may seem contrived, it is not a knife ­edge case.  Moreover, this shows that we cannot adopt the  method used to prove results in the last section,  where we deduce the maximal possible transfer  that a country is willing to make to avoid a war  and see if that avoids a war. Without specify ­ ing the p function, one cannot determine which  transfers will avoid a war. What we do know is that: • The set of parameter values where transfers  avoid a war is a subset of the commitment  case; • The set of parameters for which war is avoided  grows as C/G increases; and • The set of parameters for which war is avoided  grows as Bi decreases. The fact that smaller Bi helps avoid war is  due to the fact that this results in an increase  in the set of transfers that i is willing to make.  The effect of C/G increasing is clear, as it helps  make both countries wish to avoid a war. The  effects of Bj and wi, wj are ambiguous, as again  the technology of war 1pji2 matters. There are cases where we can deduce things  about the ability of transfers to avoid war. The  key to Example 4 is that there is a large change  in probability due to a larger transfer, so there  is a (local) convexity of the probability of win ­ ning function. If the probability function is not affected at all, as in Example , or is propor ­ tional, as in Example , then we can examine  the maximal transfers as the relevant bench ­ mark. The possibilities of avoiding war are still  VOL. 97 NO. 4 1363 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR D.  Endogenous Bias As political bias affects a country’s decisions  of whether to go to war and whether it receives  or makes transfers, it is a critical dimension of  a country. Most important, it could be that the  representative citizen (that is, an unbiased citi ­ zen) of a country would prefer to have a biased  leader. As such, we ask which political bias a  country prefers its leader to have, as viewed  from the perspective of a representative (unbi ­ ased) citizen. This is relevant not only because  some countries choose their leaders, but also  because it tells us which country leaders might  best benefit its citizens. We start by noting that in the absence of any  transfers, the representative citizen of a country  always prefers an unbiased leader over any other  leader. In the absence of any transfers, the only  decision is whether or not to go to war, and the  representative (unbiased) citizen would prefer  to have a decision maker who makes the same  decisions the citizen would. An unbiased deci ­ sion maker makes the same decisions that the  representative citizen would, while someone  with any bias would make different decisions in  at least some contexts. Now consider the case in which transfers are  available and there is commitment. Here, having  a biased leader can potentially benefit a country,  as such a leader may extract transfers from other  countries.6 It is useful to start with an example. Example  5. Endogenous Bias and a Hawk-Dove  Outcome:  Let w1 5 w2 5 00 and p1w, w2 5 1/2.  Let C 5 0.1 and G 5 0.4. In the absence of transfers, a country would  choose to attack the other if and only if its lead ­ er’s bias is above .5. It is also useful to note that  an unbiased leader is willing to pay up to 0 to  avoid war. So let us examine what happens for different  combinations of biases of the leaders. To keep  things simple, let us suppose that the bias levels  that can be chosen are either  or 3 (which, as we  country 3.5, but yields 4 in gains (as it wins for certain), and  so the larger country will still go to war. 6 This can be seen as an example of a delegation game,  where players might like to have agents play for them  who have different preferences from their own (e.g., see  Fershtman and Judd  97). See also Alastair Smith ( 99).reduced relative to the commitment case, but the  comparative statics are similar. In particular, the unbiased peace  result still  holds for the case of a proportional p function. PROPOSITION  4 (Unbiased Peace without  Commitment):  If the probability of winning is  proportional to relative wealth, then two unbi - ased countries 1Bi 5 Bj 5 2 will never go to war  if they can make transfers to each other (even  without commitment). PROOF:  In the case of proportional winning probabili ­ ties, we know that an unbiased country will not  wish to go to war with or without transfers. This is clearly not true for all probability of  winning functions. What is subtle is that, while  it is true for proportional probabilities, it is not  true for probability functions that are either less  sensitive to relative changes in wealth or more  sensitive to relative changes in wealth. This is  seen as follows. First, consider a case where p is  constant and equal to 1/2. In this case, a smaller  country will wish to go to war with a larger one,  as it has relatively little at risk and much to gain.  The transfer that a larger country is willing to  make is relative to its expected losses from a  war. After having received a transfer, the small  country could still have relatively more to gain  from a war than it expects to lose.4 At the other  extreme, where the country with higher wealth  wins for sure, it is the larger country that is the  aggressor. The smaller country is willing to  pay something to avoid a war, but not its entire  wealth. After having received a transfer, the  larger country can still want to go to war, pro ­ vided there is enough wealth left in the smaller  country to justify the cost of war, as the larger  country will win for sure.5 4 For a numerical example, suppose that wj 5  and   wi 5 0, and that C 5 0. and G 5 0.. The maximal trans ­ fer that i is willing to make is .9. If such transfers were  made, the smaller country would have wealth .9 and the  larger .. The smaller country would still wish to go to  war. 5 For a numerical example, suppose that wi 5 0 and wj  5 5, and C 5 0. and G 5 0.4. Here the maximal transfer  that i is willing to make is 0. After such a transfer, the  wealths are wi 5 0 and wj 5 35. A war then costs the larger  SEPTEMBER 2007 1364 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW shall see shortly, correspond to extremes of the  equilibria). If both countries have leaders with  bias 3, then war is unavoidable. If both countries  have leaders with bias , then no war occurs  and no transfers are made. If one country has a leader with bias  and the other with bias 3, then  a transfer of exactly 0 occurs and the countries  do not go to war. In such a situation, we can think of “equilib ­ rium” biases. Two countries choosing their lead ­ ers’ biases in this example are essentially playing a Hawk ­Dove game. The unique (pure ­strategy)  type of equilibrium is for one of the countries to  have a biased leader and the other not to. More generally, the presence of transfers  provides incentives for countries to select lead ­ ers with high bias (more hawkish looking than  the citizens would want in the absence of stra ­ tegic considerations). The example above sug ­ gests, however, that this cannot generally be  true for both countries, since the representative  citizens prefer to avoid war. Hence, the model  suggests a simple reason for the coexistence of  endogenously biased and unbiased leaders in  equilibrium. We can state this more generally. The game  is described as follows. Fix w, w, C, G, and p.  Countries simultaneously choose B, B. If there  are mutually acceptable transfers that would  avoid war in a case where war would occur in  the absence of transfers given B, B, then the  minimum transfer to avoid war is made and there  is commitment so that no war then ensues.7 If  there are no mutually acceptable transfers that  would avoid war, then war ensues. If neither  country wishes to go to war, then no transfers  are made and there is no war. An equilibrium is a pair B, B such that for  each i there does not exist any B9i such that the  expected utility of an unbiased citizen of coun ­ try i in the game is greater under B9i, Bj than  under Bi, Bj. PROPOSITION 5: Consider the endogenous  bias game in a situation where  . pi1wi, wj2  . 0. 7 We could work with any predictable transfer scheme.  In the extreme case where one of the countries wins  for certain, the existence of a pure strategy equilibrium  appears to be an issue unless we put an upper bound on the  possible bias choices. (i) There always exists an equilibrium that  avoids war. In any such equilibrium B1  $ 1 and B2 $ 1, with at least one holding  strictly.  (ii) The set of equilibria that avoid war is the  pairs 1B, B2 such that B1 $  and B2 $   and either  • B1 $ Gw p 1 pw and B1B 2 Gw p2    5  1 Gp    ,    or  • B $ Gw p 1 pw and B1B 2 Gw p2    5  1 Gp    .  (iii) There exist equilibria where there is war if  and only  if pw . Cw1 and pw . Cw2. PROOF:  See the Appendix. The pure strategy “war” equilibria in (iii) are  somewhat less reasonable than the other equilib ­ ria in the following sense. In such “war” equi ­ libria, a country chooses a very high bias simply  because it expects the other country to choose  such a high bias that there is no chance of find ­ ing transfers that will avoid a war in the second  stage. These strategies are not quite eliminated  via an elimination of dominated strategies, as  it is still conceivable that the other country will choose a low bias (below ) and then the country  will get a large payment, and so an iterative elim ­ ination of weakly dominated strategies is needed  to rule out such behavior.9 Alternatively, if one  country moves first, there is a unique subgame  perfect equilibrium outcome: it is the first coun ­ try’s most preferred of the equilibrium outcomes  described in Proposition 5, as effectively that  country becomes a Stackleberg leader picking  its highest possible bias where war is avoided. The result above gives us an idea that there is  a well ­defined sense in which countries would  prefer to have biased leaders. The argument then  9 A representative citizen can generally lose only by hav ­ ing a leader with a bias lower than  compared to having a  leader with a bias of  (as the only time that changes outcomes  is where the leader would make transfers that are larger than  the citizen would be willing to make to avoid war).CwCw pwpw CwCw CC CwCw pwpw CwCw CC VOL. 97 NO. 4 1365 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR and war is avoided. If p 5 0, then the equilib ­ rium is for country  to choose a bias of  and  country  to choose a bias of no more than ;  country  makes a transfer of 0 to country   and again war is avoided. With uncertainty, all equilibria have the fol ­ lowing play on the equilibrium path: for higher  values of p, country  will choose a bias of 3 and  country  will choose a bias of no more than ,  and with probability p, a war will be avoided,  but with a probability of 112p2 a war will  ensue. Once p is low enough, country  plays  a “safer” strategy of choosing a bias of  and  country  responds with a bias of no more than   and war is always avoided. In this case, with  probability 12p country  gets a transfer of  0, but with probability p the country ends up  getting a lower transfer of 5. It is straightforward  to verify the statements above, so we simply  outline the main arguments. First, note that in  any equilibrium, country,  will choose a bias of  either  or 3. Choosing a bias above 3 is worse  than choosing a bias slightly below 3, as the first  strategy always leads to war while the second  one leads to a response that leads to transfers in some cases and to an improvement for country .  Choosing a bias below 3 and not equal to  is  worse for country  than slightly increasing the  bias, as this sometimes leads to a higher transfer (and it can be checked that country ’s response  will result in war under the same circumstances  and in higher transfers when transfers are made). Thus, things boil down to a choice of either  or  3 for country . It is then easy to check that a  bias of  will be chosen by country  only when  it would be met with a response of a bias of no more than  by country , and otherwise a bias  of 3 will be chosen and this must be responded to with a bias of no more than  in equilibrium  (or else a deviation to a slightly lower bias would  be improving, and we have already argued that  such a bias is not part of an equilibrium). III.  Stability and Alliances Let us now consider settings where there are  many countries. the same for any bias that country  chooses, provided that  bias does not exceed  .suggests that we should end up seeing an out ­ come where at least one of the countries has a high bias and both biases are at least , and we  should expect to see war avoided. If we enrich this analysis by introducing some  natural sort of uncertainty at the time where the  bias is chosen, so that countries might not have  a perfect prediction of their future wealth or of  the future technology of war, then we should  see positive biases and occasional wars. In par ­ ticular, if we then examine an equilibrium with  uncertainty, countries may end up choosing biases strictly above  and going to war with  some positive probability. Announcing a bias below  is dominated by choosing a bias of ,  and a situation in which both countries choose a bias of  is not an equilibrium, as one country  would gain by raising their announcement. So,  equilibrium will involve some higher announce ­ ments, but now the countries also trade off some  probability of potential wars, depending on  how the later uncertainty about relative wealth  and probabilities of winning a war works out.  Exactly how high that bias would be and how  frequently war would ensue depend on the spe ­ cifics of the uncertainty. The availability of  transfers and enforceable treaties may therefore  be themselves indirect causes of war, insofar as  they give ex ante incentives to (s)elect biased  leaders, and to the degree that there is substan ­ tial uncertainty about the circumstances that the  leaders will face. As the trade ­offs and basic ideas are fairly  clear, and solving for the general form of equilib ­ rium appears to be intractable, we illustrate these  ideas with a simple extension of Example 5. Example  6. Endogenous Bias with Uncertainty:   Let w1 5 w2 5 00, C 5 0.1, and p100, 002  5 1/2. The uncertainty is about the potential  gains from war. It is G 5 0.4 with probability p  and G 5 0.6 with probability 12p. We examine a case where country  chooses  its bias first, and this is observed before coun ­ try  chooses its bias. If p 5 , then country  chooses a bias of 3  and country  chooses a bias of no more than ,  country  makes a transfer of 0 to country ,30  30 With the protocol of using the minimum transfer nec ­ essary, the transfer needed to keep  from choosing war is  SEPTEMBER 2007 1366 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW A.  Bilateral Stability Consider some set of countries 5, … , n6,  their respective wealths 1w, … , wn2 and biases  1B, … , Bn2, a technology of war that is specified  for each pair ij, pij, and relative costs and gains  C and G. We say that such a configuration of  countries is bilaterally stable  if there would be  no war between any two of the countries if they  met, even in the absence of any transfers.3 Bilateral stability is characterized by having  (3) fail to hold for each pair of countries. We can  see directly from (3) that if the relative costs of  war ( C/G) are high enough, then we will have  bilateral stability. Beyond that, we need to know  more about the probability of winning func ­ tion and how that compares to the biases. The  following proposition outlines one case where  bilateral stability holds. PROPOSITION 6 (Democratic Stability):  If  all countries are politically unbiased and the  probability of winning a war is proportional  to wealth, then the countries are bilaterally  stable. PROOF:  This follows directly from Remark  . We can also say something about how biased  countries can be while still having bilateral sta ­ bility. The following proposition works for more  general war technologies, but starting from a  point where all countries have equal wealth.PROPOSITION 7:  If all countries have equal  wealth and pij is symmetric,3 then the configu - ration is bilaterally stable if and only if Bj #  112C G  for all j. PROOF:  This follows from (3), setting pji 5 1/2 and wi  5 wj. 3 In international relations there are a variety of notions  of stability. Given that in a bilaterally stable situation no  resource is transferred by definition, this notion is closest  to that of “resource stability” in Emerson M.S. Niou et al.  (99). 3 pij is symmetric if pij1w, w92 5 pji1w9, w2.Beyond these propositions, bilateral stability  can be directly characterized by bilateral checks  of (3). B. Coalitional Stability Another question we address when exam ­ ining many countries concerns alliances and  coalitional stability. One way of modeling alliances is as fol ­ lows. When a set k of countries form an alli ­ ance, the decision maker from country i still  has aiwi in terms of wealth at risk (and thus  loses 1C1G2aiwi if a war is lost), and shares  a9i  wi /gj[Kwj of the spoils of war or transfers.  Alliance decisions are unanimous (pure col ­ lective action). Each country’s decision maker  must be willing to undertake an offensive war in  order for it to happen. The default is not to attack  unless the coalition is unanimous about doing so,  which reflects the idea that the coalition might  dissolve otherwise.33 The maximum total trans ­ fer that an alliance might make in order to avoid  a war is the maximum sum of transfers across  its members, such that each would be willing to  contribute their part in order to avoid a war. The technology of war is presumed to be  given by a function p which depends only on the  total wealth of the warring alliances. With this structure of alliances in mind, we  can consider whether there exist configurations  of alliances such that the alliances are bilater ­ ally stable (no alliance wishes to attack any  other alliance); and whether there exist configu ­ rations of alliances that are immune to devia ­ tions by any subset of countries (which might  quit their current alliance and join with others  to form a new alliance). We can also consider  33 As explained in Giovanni Maggi and Morelli ( 006),  a unanimity requirement for collective action is the norm  when the participation of all allies is necessary and the  value of future expected cooperation with the other allies is  not sufficient to convince a dissenting member to go along  with the decision of a majority. When the participation of  all allies is not necessary, the formation of a “coalition of  the willing” can suffice. We do not consider this distinc ­ tion here. See James D. Morrow ( 99) for the view that  alliances entail a pledge of future coordination between  the allies. Note also that the degree of consensus necessary  in an alliance could be different depending on whether it  is a defensive or an offensive alliance. A world with large  defensive alliances and small offensive ones could be quite  stable. VOL. 97 NO. 4 1367 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR of potential opponents (countries or alliances),  then if countries were not too biased, the core  would be very large, as unbiased countries or  alliances would not wish to go to war in the face  of such a technology. Thus, the incentives to  form alliances are more prevalent when relative  wealth swings the anticipated outcome more  dramatically. When we allow for configurations with het ­ erogeneity of bias levels, it is difficult to char ­ acterize conditions for the nonemptiness of the  core, or to determine which alliances are most  likely to form. However, we can still explore a  few things. It is possible to have alliance configurations  that are bilaterally stable and such that no indi ­ vidual country would strictly want to quit its  existing alliance either to be alone or to join  another alliance. Let us call such an alliance  configuration individually stable. Let w denote  the total wealth of an alliance. PROPOSITION : Consider any parameters C  and G, and any continuous p such that p 1w, W2,  w/W when w/W approaches 0.34 If there exist  at least two countries with biases close enough  to , biases of countries are bounded above, and  there are enough countries such that each coun - try’s wealth is sufficiently small relative to the  total world wealth, then there exists a division  of countries into two alliances that is individu - ally stable. In such a situation, a single alliance  of all countries is also individually stable. The proof is relatively straightforward, and  hence we simply outline it. Separate the two  countries with lowest biases. Then, around each,  form an alliance so that the total wealths in the  two alliances are as close to each other as pos ­ sible. Given the continuity of p, the probability  of either alliance winning a war approaches  1/2. With a small enough bias, the least biased  country in each alliance will prefer not to go to  war. Consider any country switching alliances.  Their wealth, if small enough relative to total  wealth, will make too small a change in prob ­ abilities of outcomes to change the incentives  34 More precisely, consider p such that p1w, W2W/w S 0  as w S 0, for any fixed W . 0.weaker deviations, asking whether there is any  single country that wishes to quit its current alli ­ ance and would be unanimously accepted into  some other alliance. Finally, we can differenti ­ ate between offensive and defensive alliances. Let us begin with a couple of examples that  make clear some of the issues that arise. The  first example illustrates why there are interest ­ ing alliance issues that arise and why we might  want to move beyond simply studying bilateral  stability. Example  7. Consider three equal sized countries  with w1 5 w2 5 w3 and B 5 B 5 B3. If the  corresponding B’s are not too high, this could  be bilaterally stable. However, this is not neces ­ sarily coalitionally stable. Two countries might  have an incentive to form an (offensive) alli ­ ance and exclude the third country. This could  strengthen them so that they might either wish  to go to war regardless of any transfers, and both  benefit in expected terms from doing so, or to  obtain a transfer. For example, in the case of  unbiased countries and higher wealth winning,  two countries that band together expect to gain  from going to war with the third country. The next example illustrates that countries  could form alliances, not for offensive purposes  (as above), but instead for defensive purposes. Example  8. Consider three countries where one’s  wealth is twice the size of each of the others.  By forming an alliance, for some choices of Bi’s,  the two smaller countries avoid being attacked  or having to pay a transfer. For example, if it  is the greatest wealth that wins, then separately  the two smaller countries are sure to lose a war,  while if allied they have an even chance of  winning. Clearly, from the examples above, it is pos ­ sible that there will not exist any configuration  of countries or alliances that is bilaterally stable  (so that no alliance would attack another in the  absence of any transfers). These examples also suggest that the incen ­ tive to form an alliance (offensive and defensive,  respectively) derives from the sensitivity of the p  function. If p were independent of wealth, then  countries would not gain at all from forming  an alliance. If the probability of winning were  proportional to the relative wealth for any pair  SEPTEMBER 2007 1368 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW of the alliances.35 The only remaining possibil ­ ity is that a country could gain from autarchy.  However, in that case, providing countries are  small enough relative to total wealth, even with  maximal bias, (3) fails to hold for the departing  country, as its probability of winning is so small  relative to the maximal potential gains that it  will not have an incentive to go to war with one  of the (large) alliances. Comparing the situation described in exam ­ ple 7 with the constructed stability of a pair of  alliances in Proposition , one can conclude that  in our model a “bipolar” system will (under the  right circumstances) be stable when a multipolar  one may not be.36 IV.  Further Results and Discussion As should be clear from some of the analysis  above, this basic model of political bias opens  the door for much future research. Let us com ­ ment on a few of the more obvious areas for fur ­ ther exploration. First of all, one can examine the predictions of  the model empirically. One can do this by a struc ­ tural fit of the model, estimating wealth, costs,  gains, and war technology ( p) directly from the  data, and either imputing the biases or estimat ­ ing them based on other political variables. The  predictions of the model about the role of the  technology of war could also lead to interesting  empirical research on historical data. One can also develop variations on the model  that endogenize various parameters (other than  bias) that we have taken to be exogenous. Let us  mention a few ideas in this direction. • The model could be coupled with a growth  model so that wealths change over time. As  wealths change, so will incentives to go to  war (and incentives to capture territory to  help with growth), and one could track how  35 The only possible exception is if the least biased coun ­ try leaves and the remaining countries are strongly biased,  but then that can lead only to the biased country alliance  wanting to attack the other alliance, which does not benefit  the country that switched. 36 This is in line with the general concerns about tripolar  systems, for instance, as expressed by Morton A. Kaplan  (957). For counterarguments about the special stability  features of tripolar systems, see Charles W. Ostrom, Jr., and John H. Aldrich ( 97) and Wagner ( 96).the economics of growth interacts with the  incentives for international conflict. • One could enrich the technology of war to  allow for investments in arms, so that the  probability of winning a war depended on  military spending and not simply on wealth  directly. • We could enrich the model to endogenize the  timing and choice of confrontation, so that  we not only examine stability or the choices  of two countries once faced with war, but  also model more completely how it is that  two countries start to consider a war and  how this might depend on the more general  environment. Beyond such enrichment of the model, we  note other aspects of the current model that  deserve further attention. We have limited the  transfers that can be made to those from one  country to another. For example, we have not  considered situations where transfers can be  made in both directions simultaneously, nor  have we allowed a country to buy off another  country’s leader directly, or a country to buy off  its own leader. To see some of the issues, note  that under a strict interpretation of the model,  biased leaders would like to make transfers back  and forth to each other. They see only part of  the costs and appropriate a larger share of the  gains of any mutual transfers. Essentially, they  could loot each other’s countries. While this is  plausible within the model, it is partly because  we have modeled all sorts of distorted incen ­ tives that leaders might have to go to war (glory,  power gains, personal ambitions, etc.) through  the lens of a pure financial bias. Nevertheless,  while such cross ­looting activity might seem  contrived, it is worthy of further study, as the  incentives for such activity are strong. This is  also true simply of allowing a country to make  transfers directly to the leader of a country, as  this can make the impact of a transfer larger.  Neither of these completely eliminates war,  even with commitment, as the biases of the two  countries’ leaders may be too high to overcome;  but this could add leverage to the transfers. Of  course, if all parties involved can make trans ­ fers, and complete commitment on the part of  all parties is possible, then an efficient outcome  can be realized. So some imperfection in the  bargaining is needed for wars to occur. VOL. 97 NO. 4 1369 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR side is bounded above by . Essentially, even if  the country is sure to win the war, it does not  wish to go to war because the costs outweigh the  spoils of war against a much smaller country.37  Thus, the model displays a novel “endogenous  limit to the expansion of an empire,” in contrast  with the systemic explanations in the literature. Interestingly, depending on the technology  of war, as one country becomes much wealthier  it may no longer wish to go to war, but it may  become an attractive target for smaller coun ­ tries, since they may have much to gain and  little to lose.3 Whether or not this is the case  depends on how fast pji increases in wj. In the  long run (i.e., after each pair of countries has  faced the temptation of war or gone to war suf ­ ficiently many times), a war between countries  of very different wealth (winners and losers of  past wars, respectively) will be possible only if  the poorer country wants it. Appendix Let wji 5 wj/wi. PROOF OF PROPOSITION  : We know that (3) is the condition to satisfy  for j to be willing to go to war against i in the  absence of transfers. Similarly, country i wishes  to go to war with country j if and only if (0)  12pji . 11C G 11Biwji. Part (iii) follows directly from (3) and ( 0), as  both right ­hand sides are increasing in C/G. Next, note that from (3) and ( 0) it follows that  both countries want to go to war if and only if ()  1211C G 11Biwji . pji . 11C G 11Bjwij. 37 It might be more reasonable to presume that the costs  of going to war against a much smaller country are small.  If, however, the costs of going to war have any lower bound,  the conclusion will still hold. 3 Again, this seems to be consistent with the history of  how the largest empires came to an end after a sequence of  attacks by weaker challengers.A. dynamics As our analysis has been static, and yet inter ­ national relations are clearly dynamic, we close  with some observations on this topic. The most basic and important aspect that  dynamics introduces is that as countries get  richer, their incentives change. As a country j  has won past wars, three things happen. First,  its wealth increases, and so the wij 5 wi/wj ratios  it faces will decrease. This in turn has a sec ­ ond effect which is that pji increases. Third, as  more wealth is acquired, the pivotal agent’s per ­ centage share of the wealth increases and so Bj  decreases. To see this, note that before a war the  agent’s share is aj. After the war, if the country  wins, the agent’s share is ()  aj112C2wj1ar   j  Gwi 112C2wj1Gwi. If a9j . aj, then this new share is larger than aj.  Thus, the new Bj is a9j over this new share, and  so as a country keeps winning wars, Bj will  decrease. Let us examine the implications of these  changes over time. We know from (3) that a  country will want to go to war (without consid ­ eration of transfers) if (9)  pji . 11C G 11Bjwi wj . As we see from this, if a country has become  wealthier through the winning of past wars, then  the right ­hand side of this expression will have  increased as both Bj and wij will have decreased  (if we are holding the wealth of a given oppo ­ nent constant). On the other hand, the left ­hand  side will also go up as pji increases. While we cannot say what the short ­term  effects of this are, we can say that a country will  not wish to keep going to war for too long. This  follows from noting that pji is bounded above  by , while wij can go to 0. As a country becomes  much wealthier than other countries, it no longer desires to go to war, as the right ­hand side of (9)  will converge to   1 1C/G2, while the left ­hand  SEPTEMBER 2007 1370 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW It is clear that if Bi 5 Bj 5 , then the inequal ­ ities in ( ) require that   2 11C G 11wji . 11C G 11wij. To see that this is impossible, rewrite the   inequality above as   1 wij211C G wji . 11C G. This simplifies to  2wijC G . C G, which is clearly impossible. This proves (i). The proof of (ii) derives from the following  observation: the left ­hand side of ( ) converges  to  as Bi gets large, and the right ­hand side of  () converges to 0 as Bj gets large. PROOF OF PROPOSITION  :  As j wishes to go to war but i does not, (3)  holds but ( 0) does not. The condition that needs  to be satisfied for country j to no longer wish to  go to war against i if offered tij . 0 is  112C2G2ajwj1pjiG1ajwj1ar   j  wi2    # ajwj1ar   j  tij. This simplifies to ()  pjiG1wj1Bjwi2 #  1C1G2wj1Bj tij. Similarly, the condition for i to be willing to  make a transfer tij . 0 to avoid a war is (3)  112pji2G1wi1Biwj2     # 1C1G2wi2tij. Note that we assume that the pivotal agent in  country j gets the same proportion 1a9j2 of tij as  it would if it were a spoil of war, and the pivotal  agent in country i pays the same proportion 1ai2  of tij as it risks its wealth in a war. Let tp i1Bi2 be the transfer that makes country i  (which wishes to avoid war) indifferent between  going to war and paying such a transfer, i.e., the transfer that makes ( 3) hold as equality. In  other words, tp i1Bi2 is the maximum transfer that  i is willing to make in order to avoid the war.  Then, from ( 3), (4)  tp i1Bi2 5 1C 1 G2wi 2 1 2 pji2G1wi 1 Biwj2. Substituting ( 4) in ( ), a transfer can be  made so that country j no longer wishes to go  to war if  pjiG1wj 1 Bjwi2 # 1C 1 G2wj 1 Bj1C 1 G2wi   2 Bj1 2 pji2G1wi 1 Biwj2. This can be rewritten as (5)  C G $ 112pji21BiBj212 11Bjwij. When we combine this with (3) we obtain the  following characterization of when transfers  avoid a war: (6)  pji1 1 Bjwij2 2  . C G     . 112pji21BiBj212 111Bjwij2. The comparative statics in the proposition are  then clear. PROOF OF PROPOSITION 3:  Given proposition (i), we know that when  two unbiased countries meet, the situation with ­ out transfers is either such that they both wish  to avoid war or that one country alone wishes  to go to war. If the situation is the former, we  are done. If it is the latter, then assume without  loss of generality that j is the one that wants to  go to war and i is the one that does not. We have  established above that, in this case, the avail ­ ability of transfers eliminates the incentive of j  to go to war if ( 5) holds. Thus, the result fol ­ lows, noting that the right ­hand side of ( 5) is 0  with two unbiased countries. PROOF OF PROPOSITION 5: Recall from ( 4) that tp i1Bi2 is the maximum  transfer that i would be willing to make to avoid  war in a case where i would not (strictly) desire  VOL. 97 NO. 4 1371 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR as otherwise j could deviate by raising their bias  and be strictly better off. It follows that Bi $ ,  or else i would be better off deviating and stat ­ ing  (and then going to war, since tp i1Bi2 . tp i12  when Bi , ). Similarly for j. If both were equal  to , then it would be direct to check that tp i12 .  tr j12, which is then a contradiction. Next, let us show (ii). We know from above  that Bi $  and Bj $ . The other conditions,  respectively, are precisely that one country (say  j) weakly wishes to go to war, and that tr j1Bj2  5 tp i1Bi2. Following the logic above, these are  necessary for equilibrium, and are also clearly  sufficient. Finally, we show (iii). If pijwj # Cwi, then it  follows that tp i12 . tr j1Bj2 for all Bj. This implies  that regardless of j’s announcement, i could  avoid a war and make a payment of less than  tp i12 by setting Bi 5 . Since i prefers this to  war, war could not be an equilibrium outcome.  Thus, any war equilibrium requires that pijwj .  Cwi for both countries. To see the converse, note  that if pijwj . Cwi for both countries, then there  exists Bj . Bjw such that tp i12 , tr j1Bj2 and simi ­ larly there is such a Bi . Biw with tp j12 , tr i1Bi2.  Such a pair form an equilibrium where war  ensues, since both strictly prefer to go to war,  and they could avoid war only by announcing  some bias below  and making a payment above  their maximum willingness to pay (as they are  truly unbiased). REFERENCES Baliga,  Sandeep,  and  Tomas  Sjöström.  004.  “Arms Races and Negotiations.” Review of  Economic Studies,  7(): 35–69. Blainey,  Geoffrey.  973. The Causes of War . New  York: The Free Press. Bueno  de Mesquita,  Bruce.  9. The War Trap .  New Haven: Yale University Press. Bueno  de Mesquita,  Bruce,  and  Randolph  M.  Siverson.  995. “War and the Survival of  Political Leaders: A Comparative Study of  Regime Types and Political Accountability.”  war. If both were strictly less, then j could deviate and set  Bj to a level above Bjw so that 0 , tr j1Bj2 # tp i1Bi2 and strictly  gain. It must be that the transfers are compatible, or else  war would not be avoided.to go to war in the absence of any transfers, and  that (7)  tp i1Bi2 5 Gwi  pji1Cwi2pijGBiwj. Let tr j1Bj2 be the minimum transfer that j would  be willing to accept to avoid war in a case where  j would strictly desire to go to war in the absence  of any transfers. Thus, from ( ) it follows that ()  tr j1Bj2 5 Gwi  pji 2 1 Bj 1Cwj 1 Gwj  pij2. Let Bw i . 0 denote the level of bias such that i  is just indifferent between war and not going to  war. The existence of such a level is guaranteed  by the assumption that  . pij . 0. Note that tp i1Bi2 . 0 if and only if Bi , Biw  (i.e., when i strictly prefers to avoid war), and  thus equality holds in both at the same time.  Also, note that tr j1Bj2 . 0 if and only if Bj . Bjw  (i.e., when j strictly prefers to go to war), and  thus equality holds in both at the same time. Let us now prove (i). First, consider the case  where Cwi2pij  Gwj $ 0 for some country i.  This implies that tp i12 . tr j1Bj2 for each Bj. So,  pick any Bj . Bjw. Then, pick Bi such that tp i1Bi2  5 tr j1Bj2. Such a Bi exists and is less than Bw i  since tp i12 . tr j1Bj2 . 0 and tp i1Biw2 5 0, and tp i1 · 2  is decreasing in Bi. It follows easily that this pair  is an equilibrium. Next, consider the case where Cwi2pij  Gwj  , 0 for each i. Without loss of generality, let i be  a country that does not want to go to war when  unbiased (noting from the unbiased peace result  that at least one country does not wish to go to war at a bias of ). In this case, it follows that  tp i12 , Gwi  pji. Find Bj . Bw j such that tr j1Bj2 5  tp i1Bi2. We know that such a Bj exists since tr j1Bj2  S Gwi  pji  as Bj S `, and since tr j1Bjw2 5 0 and  tr j1 · 2 is increasing. Again, it follows easily that  this pair is an equilibrium. Finally, we need to show that in any equilib ­ rium where war is avoided, Bi $ , Bj $ , and at  least one is greater than . Let Bi, Bj be an equi ­ librium where war is avoided. It must be, wlog in  labeling, that Bi # Bw i and Bj $ Bjw, and tr j1Bj2 #  tp i1Bi2.39 It must then also be that tr j1Bj2 5 tp i1Bi2,  39 If both were strictly more than their respective indif ­ ference levels, then there would be no transfers to avoid  SEPTEMBER 2007 1372 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW American Political Science Review , 9(4):  4–55.  Bueno  de Mesquita,  Bruce,  James  D. Morrow,  Randolph  M. Siverson,  and  Alastair  Smith.  999. “An Institutional Explanation of the  Democratic Peace.” American Political Sci - ence Review , 93(4): 79 –07. Bueno  de Mesquita,  Bruce,  James  D. Morrow,  Randolph  M. Siverson,  and  Alastair  Smith.  003. Logic of Political Survival . Cambridge,  MA: MIT Press.  Chiozza,  Giacomo,  and  Hein  E. Goemans.  004.  “International Conflict and the Tenure of Lead­ ers: Is War Still Ex Post Costly?” Amer ican  Journal of Political Science , 4(3): 604– 9. Clausewitz,  Carl  von.  3. On War . Trans.  and ed. by Michael Howard and Peter Paret.  Princeton: Princeton University Press, 976. Crawford,  Vincent  P. 9. “A Theory of  Disagreement in Bargaining.” Econometrica ,  50(3): 607–37. Downs,  George  W.,  and  David  M.  Rocke.  994. “Conflict, Agency, and Gambling for  Resurrection: The Principal ­Agent Problem  Goes to War.” American Journal of Political  Science , 3(): 36–0. Doyle,  Michael  W. 96. “Liberalism and World  Politics.’’ American Political Science Review ,  0(4): 5–69. Fearon,  James.  995. “Rationalist Explanations  for War.” International Organization , 49(3):  379–4 4. Fearon,  James.  996. “Bargaining over Objects  that Influence Future Bargaining Power.”  Unpublished. Fearon,  James.  997. “Signaling Foreign Policy  Interests: Tying Hands versus Sinking Costs.”  Journal of Conflict Resolution , 4(): 6–90. Fershtman,  Chaim,  and  Kenneth  L. Judd.  97.  “Equilibrium Incentives in Oligopoly.” Ameri - can Economic Review , 77(5): 9 7–40. Findlay,  Ronald.  996. “Towards a Model of Terri­ torial Expansion and the Limits of E mpires.  ” In The Political Economy of Co nflict and  Appropriation , ed. Michelle Garfinkel and  Stergios Skaperdas, 4 –56. New York: Cam­ bridge University Press. Gartzke,  Erik  A. 999. “War Is in the Error Term.”   International Organization , 53(3): 567– 7. Harris,  William  V. 979. War and Imperialism in  Republican Rome 327-70 BC . Oxford: Oxford  University Press.Harrison,  Mark.  005. “Why the Rich Won:  Economic Mobilization and Economic Devel­ opment in Two World Wars.” Unpublished. Hirshleifer,  Jack.  99. “Conflict and Rent ­seek­ ing Success Functions: Ratio vs. Difference  Models of Relative Success.” Public Choice ,  63: 0–. Jervis,  Robert.  976. Perception and Misper - ception in International Politics . Princeton:  Princ eton University Press. Jervis,  Robert.  97. “Cooperation under the  Security Dilemma.’’ World Politics , 30( ):  67–4. Jones,  Stephen  R. G. 99. “Have Your Lawyer  Call My Lawyer: Bilateral Delegation in Bar­ gaining Situations.” Journal of Economic  Beha vior and Organization , (): 59–74. Jordan,  James  S. 006. “Pillage and Property.”  Journal of Economic Theory , 3(): 6–44. Kaiser,  David.  990. Politics and War: European  Conflict from Philip II to Hitler . Cambridge,  MA: Harvard University Press. Kant,  Immanuel.  795. “Toward Perpetual Peace:  A Philosophical Sketch.” In kant’s Political  Writings , ed. Reiss, 93– 30. New York:  Cambridge University Press, 99. Kaplan,  Morton  A. 957. System and Process in  International Relations , New York: Wiley. Kirshner,  Jonathan.  000. “Rationalist Expl ana­ tions for War?” Security Studies , 0(): 43–50. Lake,  David  A. 99. “Powerful Pacifists: Dem­ ocratic States and War.” American Political  Science Review , 6(): 4–37. Liberman,  Peter.  993. “The Spoils of Conquest.”  International Security , (): 5–53. Maggi,  Giovanni,  and  Massimo  Morelli.  006.  “Self ­Enforcing Voting in International Organ­ izations.” American Economic Review , 96(4):  37–5. Morgan, T. Clifton, and Sally H. Campbell.  99.  “Domestic Structure, Decisional Constraints,  and War: So Why Kant Democracies Fight?’’  Journal of Conflict Resolution  35(June):  94–7. Morrow,  James  D. 99. “Alliances and Asym­ metry: an Alternative to the Capability Aggre­ gation Model of Alliances,” American Jou rnal  of Political Science , 35(4): 904–33. Nash,  John  F. 953. “Two ­Person Cooperative  Games,” Econometrica , : –40. Niou,  Emerson  M.S.,  Peter  C. Ordeshook,  and  Gregory  F. Rose.  99. The Balance of Power:  VOL. 97 NO. 4 1373 JACk SON  ANd MORELLI : POLITICAL  BIAS ANd WAR and Commitments.” Unpublished. Smith,  Alastair.  99. “Fighting Battles, Winning  Wars.” Journal of Conflict Resolution , 4(3):  30–0. Tarar,  Ahmer.  006. “Diversionary Incentives  and the Bargaining Approach to War.’’ Inter - national Studies Quarterly , 50(): 69–. Tilly,  Charles.  99. Coercion, Capital, and Euro - pean States:  Ad 990-1992 . Oxford: Blackwell  Publishers. Wagner,  R. Harrison.  96. “The Theory of  Games and the Balance of Power.” World Poli - tics, 3(4): 546–76. Wagner,  R. Harrison.  000. “Bargaining and  War.” American Journal of Political Science.  44(3): 469– 4. Waltz,  Kenneth.  959. Man, the State, and War.  New York: Columbia University Press.Stability in International Systems . New York:  Cambridge University Press. Ostrom,  Charles  W.,  Jr., and  John  H. Aldrich.  97. “The Relationship Between Size and  Stability in the Major Power International  System.” American Journal of Political  Science , (4): 743–7 . Piccione,  Michele,  and  Ariel  Rubinstein.  004.  “Equilibrium in the Jungle.” Unpublished. Russett,  Bruce.  993. Grasping the democratic  Peace: Principles for a Post-Cold War World.  Princeton: Princeton University Press. Schelling,  Thomas  C. 963. The Strategy of Con - flict. New York: Oxford University Press. Schelling,  Thomas  C. 966. Arms and Influence .  New Haven: Yale University Press. Schwarz,  Michael  A.,  and  Konstantin  Sonin.  004. “A Theory of Brinkmanship, Conflicts,  This article has been cited by: 1.Philip T. Hoffman. 2017. Public Economics and History: A Review of Fiscal Regimes and the Political Economy of Premodern States, Edited by Andrew Monson and Walter Scheidel. Journal of Economic Literature  55:4, 1556-1569. [ Abstract ] [View PDF article ] [PDF with links ] 2.Marco Nilsson. 2017. Causal beliefs and war termination. Journal of Peace Research  90, 002234331773012. [ Crossref ] 3.Eyal Pecht, Asher Tishler. 2017. Budget allocation, national security, military intelligence, and human capital: a dynamic model. Defence and Peace Economics  28:3, 367-399. [ Crossref ] 4.Nobuhiro Mizuno, Ryosuke Okazawa. 2017. Within-group heterogeneity and civil war. Economics of Governance  18:2, 153-177. [ Crossref ] 5.Paola Conconi, Nicolas Sahuguet, Maurizio Zanardi. 2017. Electoral incentives, term limits, and the sustainability of peace. European Journal of Political Economy  . [Crossref ] 6.Colin Krainin, John Slinkman. 2017. Bargaining with a biased autocrat. Journal of Theoretical Politics 29:2, 273-298. [ Crossref ] 7.Christoph Mikulaschek, Jacob N. Shapiro. 2017. Lessons on Political Violence from America’s Post– 9/11 Wars. Journal of Conflict Resolution  002200271666980. [ Crossref ] 8.J. Tyson Chatagnier, Kerim Can Kavaklı. 2017. From Economic Competition to Military Combat. Journal of Conflict Resolution  13, 002200271561356. [ Crossref ] 9.Antonis Adam, Petros G. Sekeris. 2017. Self-Containment. Journal of Conflict Resolution  61:1, 173-203. [ Crossref ] 10.Kristy Buzard, Benjamin A.T. Graham, Ben Horne. 2016. Unrecognized States: A Theory of Self-Determination and Foreign Influence. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization  eww017. [Crossref ] 11.Kai A. Konrad, Florian Morath. 2016. Evolutionary determinants of war. Defence and Peace Economics 27:4, 520-534. [ Crossref ] 12.Brian Crisher, Mark Souva. 2016. Domestic Political Problems and the Uneven Contenders Paradox. Foreign Policy Analysis  orw001. [ Crossref ] 13.Thomas M. Dolan. 2016. Go Big or Go Home? Positive Emotions and Responses to Wartime Success. International Studies Quarterly  60:2, 230-242. [ Crossref ] 14.Mauro Rota. 2016. Military spending, fiscal capacity and the democracy puzzle. Explorations in Economic History  60, 41-51. [ Crossref ] 15.Alexandre Debs, Jessica Chen Weiss. 2016. Circumstances, Domestic Audiences, and Reputational Incentives in International Crisis Bargaining. Journal of Conflict Resolution  60:3, 403-433. [ Crossref ] 16.Eik Leong Swee. 2016. Economics of Civil War. Australian Economic Review  49:1, 105-111. [ Crossref ] 17.Dinissa Duvanova, Alexander Nikolaev, Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, Alexander Semenov. 2016. Violent conflict and online segregation: An analysis of social network communication across Ukraine's regions. Journal of Comparative Economics  44:1, 163-181. [ Crossref ] 18.Matthew O. Jackson, Stephen Nei. 2015. Networks of military alliances, wars, and international trade. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  112:50, 15277-15284. [ Crossref ] 19.Sidartha Gordon, Alessandro Riboni. 2015. Doubts and Dogmatism in Conflict Behaviour. The Economic Journal  125:589, 1790-1817. [ Crossref ] 20.Massimo Morelli, Dominic Rohner. 2015. Resource concentration and civil wars. Journal of Development Economics  117, 32-47. [ Crossref ] 21.Nicola Gennaioli, Hans-Joachim Voth. 2015. State Capacity and Military Conflict. The Review of Economic Studies  82:4, 1409-1448. [ Crossref ] 22.Mila Kashcheeva, Kevin K. Tsui. 2015. Political oil import diversification by financial and commercial traders. Energy Policy  82, 289-297. [ Crossref ] 23.George Tridimas. 2015. War, disenfranchisement and the fall of the ancient Athenian democracy. European Journal of Political Economy  38, 102-117. [ Crossref ] 24.Iain W. Long. 2015. Better feared than loved: Reputations and the motives for conflict. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization  114, 46-61. [ Crossref ] 25.Philip T. Hoffman. 2015. What Do States Do? Politics and Economic History. The Journal of Economic History  75:02, 303-332. [ Crossref ] 26.Jörg Franke, Tahir Öztürk. 2015. Conflict networks. Journal of Public Economics  126, 104-113. [Crossref ] 27.Avidit Acharya, Edoardo Grillo. 2015. War with Crazy Types. Political Science Research and Methods 3:02, 281-307. [ Crossref ] 28.Jennifer Brauner. 2015. Military spending and democracy. Defence and Peace Economics  1-15. [Crossref ] 29.Eyal Pecht, Asher Tishler. 2015. The value of military intelligence. Defence and Peace Economics  26:2, 179-211. [ Crossref ] 30.Francesco Caselli, Massimo Morelli, Dominic Rohner. 2015. The Geography of Interstate Resource Wars *. The Quarterly Journal of Economics  130:1, 267-315. [ Crossref ] 31.Philip Arena, Nicholas P . Nicoletti. 2014. Selectorate theory, the democratic peace, and public goods provision. International Theory  6:03, 391-416. [ Crossref ] 32.Hadas Shabtay, Asher Tishler. 2014. Budget allocation under uncertainty and the costs of war and insecurity. Defence and Peace Economics  25:5, 461-480. [ Crossref ] 33.Paola Conconi, Nicolas Sahuguet, Maurizio Zanardi. 2014. DEMOCRATIC PEACE AND ELECTORAL ACCOUNTABILITY. Journal of the European Economic Association  12:4, 997-1028. [Crossref ] 34.Stefano DellaVigna, Ruben Enikolopov, Vera Mironova, Maria Petrova, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2014. Cross-Border Media and Nationalism: Evidence from Serbian Radio in Croatia. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics  6:3, 103-132. [ Abstract ] [View PDF article ] [PDF with links ] 35.S. Zeigler, J. H. Pierskalla, S. Mazumder. 2014. War and the Reelection Motive: Examining the Effect of Term Limits. Journal of Conflict Resolution  58:4, 658-684. [ Crossref ] 36.Facundo Albornoz, Esther Hauk. 2014. Civil War and U.S. Foreign Influence. Journal of Development Economics  . [Crossref ] 37.Luis C. Corchón, Anıl Yıldızparlak. 2013. Give peace a chance: The effect of ownership and asymmetric information on peace. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization  92, 116-126. [Crossref ] 38.D. Rohner, M. Thoenig, F. Zilibotti. 2013. War Signals: A Theory of Trade, Trust, and Conflict. The Review of Economic Studies  80:3, 1114-1147. [ Crossref ] 39.PHILIP T. HOFFMAN. 2012. Why Was It Europeans Who Conquered the World?. The Journal of Economic History  72:03, 601-633. [ Crossref ] 40.Patrick L. Warren. 2012. Volunteer Militaries, The Draft, and Support for War. Economics & Politics n/a-n/a. [ Crossref ] 41.Clara Ponsati, Santiago Sanchez-Pages. 2012. Optimism and commitment: an elementary theory of bargaining and war. SERIEs  3:1-2, 157-179. [ Crossref ] 42.MARK HARRISON, NIKOLAUS WOLF. 2011. The frequency of wars1. The Economic History Review  no-no. [ Crossref ] 43.Vincent Vicard. 2011. Trade, conflict, and political integration: Explaining the heterogeneity of regional trade agreements. European Economic Review  . [Crossref ] 44.S. Baliga, D. O. Lucca, T. Sjostrom. 2011. Domestic Political Survival and International Conflict: Is Democracy Good for Peace?. The Review of Economic Studies  78:2, 458-486. [ Crossref ] 45.Charles Anderton. 2010. CHOOSING GENOCIDE: ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVES ON THE DISTURBING RATIONALITY OF RACE MURDER. Defence and Peace Economics  21:5, 459-486. [Crossref ] 46.ALEXANDRE DEBS, H.E. GOEMANS. 2010. Regime Type, the Fate of Leaders, and War. American Political Science Review  104:03, 430-445. [ Crossref ] 47.Stefan Brandauer, Florian Englmaier. 2009. A model of strategic delegation in contests between groups. Review of Economic Design  13:3, 205-232. [ Crossref ] 48.Benjamin F Jones, Benjamin A Olken. 2009. Hit or Miss? The Effect of Assassinations on Institutions and War. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics  1:2, 55-87. [ Crossref ] 49.Thomas P . Tangerås. 2009. Democracy, autocracy and the likelihood of international conflict. Economics of Governance  10:2, 99-117. [ Crossref ] 50.Thomas P . Tangerås, Nils-Petter Lagerlöf. 2009. Ethnic Diversity, Civil War and Redistribution. Scandinavian Journal of Economics  111:1, 1-27. [ Crossref ] 51.Bruce M. Russett. 2009. Democracy, War and Expansion through Historical Lenses. European Journal of International Relations  15:1, 9-36. [ Crossref ]