 36 L IBERAL EDUCATION SUMMER 2004UNDER THE BANNER of an “Academic Bill of Rights,” legislation has been introduced in Con-gress and in seven states to help remedy whatthe sponsors charge is liberal political bias oncollege campuses. The bill, which has yet to beapproved anywhere, would challenge campusesto adopt voluntarily procedures that the spon-sors claim would encourage a diversity of politi-cal perspectives among faculty, campus speakers,and student organizations. We think this partic- ular solution is mis- guided, but the issue it addresses is real. Leadersat every university agree that educating studentsin the practice of open-minded inquiry is a keycomponent of undergraduate education, but cre-ating a classroom and wider campus climate thatis truly open to multiple perspectives on hot-but-ton political issues is extremely difficult to ac-complish. This is true whether the majorityopinion on campus is conservative, as at Pepper-dine University, or liberal, as at San Jose StateUniversity. The issue came to a boil not long ago at Duke University. The Duke Conservative Union pub-lished an advertisement in the Duke studentnewspaper listing the political party affiliationsof faculty in various humanities and social sci-ence disciplines, which show ed a preponderance of Democrats. The ad suggested that a universitycommitted to diversity should have a f aculty that is more diverse in its politics. Duke University President Nan Keohane used the ad, and the reactions it triggered, as a“teachable moment.” The Conservative Union,she wrote, “has raised a question that deserves athoughtful answer. … No single political perspec-tive has a monopoly on intelligence, on any topic, and our classrooms are impoverished ifthe expression of diverse views is discouraged,either by the faculty member or by fellow stu-dents. But we are also impoverished if class-rooms become sterile forums where only blandviews can be expressed and everyone is overlycareful not to offend.”  Controversial issues We agree. If we are to educate our students forresponsible citizenship, we and they can’t steerclear of controversy. Liberal education and thevalues of the academy are all about the need toseek and consider alternative conceptions,stances, and views and to consider them respect-fully. This is the case whether the controversyconcerns theoretical and other issues within aca-demic disciplines or positions on public policy,most of which cannot be arrayed along a simpleconservative-liberal fault line. If a campus is tocommit itself to open inquiry and the explo- ration of a plurali sm of views, it should affirm the many ways in which controversy occursrather than limiting its focus to the often wearybattles between left and right. In many domains,students must learn to think clearly about contro- versial issues, to form opinions and make astrong case for them, to evaluate the evidencefor competing positions, to understand alterna-tive perspectives in their own terms, and to en-gage with opposing views with civility and asincerely open mind.  This is difficult to accomplish, perhaps espe- cially when it comes to politics. Unfortunately,in most settings, people with strong politicalopinions talk almost exclusively to those whoagree with them. Campuses should be an excep-tion but generally they are not, so neither stu-dents nor faculty are accustomed tocommunicating across ideological divisions. AndPERSPECTIVES THOMAS EHRLICH and ANNE COLBY are both senior scholars at The Carnegie Foundation for theAdvancement of Teaching.Poli t ic al Bi a sTHOMAS EHRLICH  ■ANNE COLBY If we are to  educate our  students for responsible citizenship, we and they can’t steer clear of controversyin Undergraduate Education Georgia State University PERSPECTIVESdemonizat ion of the opposition is so thoroughly woven intocontemporary American poli-tics that it is no wonder stu-dents fear being harshly judgedif they speak up for an unpopu-lar view. In part because of the power of like-minded enclaves, facultyare sometimes unaware of thevalues and beliefs that are im-plicit in their approach to a subject. For this rea-son, they may not raise their assumptions to anexplicit level for acknowledgement and examina-tion. This l ack of awareness can happen at any point on the political spectrum. Even facultywho want to encourage open debate by drawingout students with minority opinions are some-times unclear about how best to make a reallypersuasive case for a view they don’t hold. Thismakes it hard for them to guide students whoare struggling to articulate that position. Open inquiry The problem with a legislative approach to en-suring open inquiry is that it casts the issue innegative terms, as a matter of policing the fac-ulty—and the campus more broadly—to stampout “indoctrination.” Given the complexity andambiguity of both political and academic discourse, this kind ofpolicing would be impossible toimplement objectively. And castin negative terms, the effort it-self would be destructive to thegoal of civil discourse acrossideological boundaries.  By contrast, a positive ap- proach, in which administra-tion, faculty, and students from different political perspectives join together todevelop strategies for the positive pursuit ofopen inquiry, can itself contribute to a climateof openness, respect, and cooperation. Thismeans that faculty and administrative leaderson a campus should be self-conscious in raisingthe issue of open inquiry—what is it, why is itimportant, and what should the principle meanin practice? It is also important to recognize that the chal- lenge of higher education is not merely to en-courage open inquiry. The result could then berelativistic students who manage the ambiguityassociated with open inquiry by disengaging fromits outcomes. The challenge for education is tobuild character that is open and flexible, intellec-tually and deliberatively, but decisive and com-mitted when it is time to act. 38 L IBERAL EDUCATION SUMMER 2004Faculty and  administrative  leaders  on a campus  should be  self-conscious  in raising the issue  of open inquiry College of the Holy Cross  Convocations and other gath- erings at the opening of theschool year are often usefultimes to open conversationsabout these issues. Based onthese conversations, the campusmight choose to adopt the clus-ter of norms and abilitiesaround open inquiry and individual commit-ment as explicit goals and probe more deeplyinto how they can be pursued. If such goals havealready been adopted, their meaning in practicecan be reexamined at these times. Campus leaders should use multiple opportu- nities to endorse and support these goals. Mate-rials sent to newly admitted students, as oneexample, should set an expectation that the cam-pus will be a community of discourse, and thatstudents will be exposed to a diversity of opin-ion about many issues, including political per-spectives. The message should be modeled inthe range of individuals invited to speak oncampus. University officials should work withschools and departments, as well as studentgroups, to encourage bringing speakers to cam-pus with different perspectives on hot-buttonpublic policy disputes, to emphasize the open-ness of the institution to a spectrum of differingviews. Debates between outstanding advocateson different sides of controversial issues can beparticularly effective.  In the political domain, speakers should in- clude respected exemplars of open-mindednessand civility who (despite their own convictions atone or another point on the political scale) trulybelieve that in order to be effective, engaged citi-zens need to be skilled at communicating andforming alliances with people whose perspectivesare different from their own. Invited guestsshould also include those who exemplify politicalengagement as cooperative public work within acommunity, regardless of ideology, or who repre-sent positions and accomplishments that are hardto classify on a simple left/right dimension. Regarding students Campus leaders should be in regular touch with arange of student opinions to test whether thecampus climate seems to some students to stifleminority political opinions. If so, those leadersshould work with students and faculty to ensurethat forums are available for the expression ofminority views and for thoughtful explorationof multiple points of view. In many parts of theacademy, the role of scholarship is seen to include representingthe perspectives of the power-less, those who are out of theeconomic and political main-stream. Academic freedom pro-tects faculty’s right to challengeprevailing authority without punitive response. Likewise, it is important foracademic leaders, including faculty, to protectthe academic freedom of students who wish tochallenge the prevailing views within their class-room or institution. Faculty can also do much to promote the value of open-minded inquiry within the class-room. At the very least, they can examine care-fully their assignments and what they say inclass through the lens of open inquiry as acourse goal. One strategy some faculty use is toask students to conduct research on and presentthe strongest arguments they can marshal fortwo or more quite different positions on con-tentious issues. This requires them to bring a de-gree of sympathy to positions they do not hold. Faculty should also pay attention to assess- ment. Sometimes students believe their acade-mic work has been evaluated based on thepolitical views it expres ses, rather than it s qual- ity, even when this is not true. For this and otherreasons (which concern good teaching morebroadly), it is essential to make assessment crite-ria explicit and to provide as much feedback aspossible based on those criteria.  It has become a commonplace to complain about America’s polarized political landscape. Ifthe next generation of citizens is to set a differ-ent tone, they must experience in college an al-ternative to the politics of vitriol. ■■ To respond to this article, e-mail liberaled@aacu.org , with the authors’ names on the subject line. SUMMER 2004 L IBERAL EDUCATION 39 PERSPECTIVESIt is important… to protect the  academic freedom  of students who wish  to challenge the  prevailing views