 Identifying Political Bias in News Articles Konstantina Lazaridou and Ralf Krestel Hasso-Plattner-Institut, Potsdam, Germany konstantina.lazaridou@hpi.de , ralf.krestel@hpi.de 1 Motivation The power of journalism has an undeniably crucial role in the formation of the general public opinion. Media outlet owners, journalists, editors, and also bloggers not only are in the position of informing the general public about the current events, but they also convey their personal accent while doing so. They are responsible for monitoring the current a airs, selecting which of them are worth reporting, deciding the amount of space (or time in the context of TV and radio stations) they should dedicate and  nally presenting them to the readers (or audience). Considering that each of the above-mentioned steps is conducted by humans, they could contain deliberate or accidental bias. Since this can potentially a ect people's beliefs and by extension decisions, there are numerous political studies attempting to analyze bias of media outlets. They measure the scope of media bias [2], examine how it is generated [3] and detect patterns in newspapers' storytelling [1]. Furthermore, identifying media bias is not only useful to the readers, but also to the journalists, since they would be able to assess and re ect on their work. Both traditional mainstream media and modern digital media decide what and how they will report on a daily basis. Since this process is perfomed by humans, it can incorporate levels of subjectivity and objectivity, negative or positive perspectives towards a person or an event, ideological comments etc. Consequently, user-generated text is usually a mixture of fact statements, but also opinions, sentiments, humor etc. This mixture is not easily tractable and even more dicult to be classi ed as fair or biased. The text can also refer to multiple entities and their attributes, which makes the problem of automatically identifying the overall expressed opinion a highly interesting yet challenging task. Media slant can be divided into several types. The so-called gatekeeping or selection bias represents the choices of the media outlets to report an issue or not. Considering the vast amount of topics that could possibly be covered, the selection process media follow is an indication of what they  nd important and interesting enough in the world to discuss about. This process depends also on the pro le of the news provider (e.g. mainstream newspaper or personal blog) and the total amount of available space. It can also be a ected by the media outlet's owner, the target audience (in terms of age, interests, ideology, etc.), the space the outlet dedicates for advertisements and so on. Gatekeeping bias is not only topic related, but could also be geographical. When comparing local, national, or international newspapers, it becomes apparent that they tend to cover di erent events, since their readers' interests might di er respectively. In addition, an alternative expression of media bias is called issue and facts orcoverage bias. Assuming that an outlet decides to cover a certain event, this type of bias concerns how much space the event occupies, whether all aspects and information are included etc. A representative example could be the news coverage of the upcoming EU referendum in the UK. There have been statements by many politicians such as David Cameron and Bill Clinton | surveys and polls among economists have also been conducted. Hence, if a newspaper reports only a subset of the current events, readers would only relate to a few aspects of the EU referendum and thus their opinion and vote would be shaped accordingly. Furthermore, another side of media slant is framing bias, which refers to the way facts are presented. Primarly, how a fact is described depends on the outlet that presents it, namely on the newpaper's guidelines and the consistent pro le it wishes to maintain. On the other hand, the individual journalist that reports about it is responsible for conveying the truth and all aspects of it, regardless the provider's preferences or his/her own style. In spite of the latter, it often occurs that authors frame the content of an article with their beliefs, not allowing readers to capture all dimensions of an event. Moreover, the choice of language of the writer can also predispose one in a positive or negative manner to become a supporter or an opponent of an certain opinion. Finally, ideological stand bias or statement bias refers to the perspective that the author comments from. Except for pointing out the facts, reporters usually make remarks according to their point of view. Similarly to framing bias, the author's remarks might be a mixture of one's ideological beliefs and the news- paper's ideology. When it comes to political issues, for instance the problem of unemployement and underemployment, the humanitarian rights and the refugee crisis, etc. then an author's comment might also indicate their political alia- tion. The latter is not necessarily unfair for the readers, since one may prefer reading newspapers sharing their beliefs. That is, one is more likely to perceive bias the further the slant of the news is from their own position [2]. However, since this is not the general case, the media should present a com- plete view of the current a airs, without neglecting to report information or pro- moting a single aspect. In order to tackle the above-mentioned challenges and eciently detect the potential media bias, we propose an automatic approach. Human annotations are not an entirely reliable source and may involve subjectiv- ity. Although there are cases where they can be used to assist computer science models in the bias detection process, they are generally cumbersome, expensive to obtain and could contain a dose of personal bias (also known as annotator bias). Additionally, considering the extremely big amount of news documents online, an automatic method appears to be the most e ective and promising choice to analyze these data and extract usefull information from it. In this PhD thesis we aim at discovering a speci c kind of media bias, that is the underlying political bias of a newspaper. Our goal is to detect the newspa- per's choices that reveal its political aliation. Our motivation derives initially from that the fact that news articles are supposed to convey all aspects of the truth regardless the newspaper's political position and secondly from the chal- lenges that news media analysis entails. Newspapers do not explicitly express their preferences and thus make our task more dicult compared to analyzing political blog posts, tweets or political statements. In order to achieve this goal, all the above-mentioned types of media slant are of interest for us, yet not in terms of the newspaper's general preferences but its political ones. Interesting patterns to discover are whether an outlet covers an unusually large number of stories that involve a certain party or a certain range of parties (left-wing, right-wing etc.), whether the journalists consistently present a party's actions positively or negatively and  nally whether they criticize or agree with a given political party in their remarks. 2 Related Work 2.1 Biased Language Regarding the discovery of biased language in text documents, related research includes framing and epistemological bias detection in Wikipedia articles [4], where bias driven human edits are identi ed and a logistic regression model is trained that captures the biased words in sentences. Moreover, [5] performs an empirical study where users annotate sentences of political text as biased or not, and in the  rst case they are also asked to identify the biased word in the sentence. Another kind of text where bias is not expected and is considered misplaced are the academic papers. The authors in [6] use supervised models to predict the political leaning of an economist based on his/her research pa- pers and they also perform an experimental comparison between supervised and unsupervised approaches for this purpose. 2.2 Prejudiced Perspectives and Disputed Views Ideological bias detection is closely related to perspective orview identi cation of a writer. A news article could be written from the view of the conservatives, democrats, liberals, etc. In this direction, Lin et al. [7] analyze the political perspective in articles both on document level and sentence level. They use statistical models like SVM and naive Bayes to uncover the word choices of the authors that depict their ideological perspective. A further related topic to political bias detection is to identify disputed issues that di erent people, such as reporters, present totally di erent opinions about. These opposite points of view could correspond to di erent political leaning as well. [8] identi es topics in UK and US newspapers by making use of DBpedia links and computes the sentiment that these topics contain in order to discover the con icting ones. Park et al. [9] introduce a new version of HITS algorithm to identify the main disputants of a topic and they later use SVM to classify news articles into di erent viewpoints of a story. 2.3 Individuals' Political Leaning An alternative kind of users that instead of being in uenced by media slant participate actively in the information di usion are social media users. Twitter users constitute a representative example, since they openly convey their opin- ions by tweeting or re-tweeting others posts. Fang et. al [13] address political classi cation on Twitter by using a naive Bayes classi er that utilizes topical information, while Cohen and Ruths [12] focus on the Twitter dataset selection criteria to ensure that the performance of political orientation classi ers is not in uenced and overoptimistic. 2.4 Bias in Political Text Another relevant research topic to political classi cation of tweets is the detection of the underlying political bias in political blogs. Jiang and Argamon [15] identify subjective sentences in blog posts and the involved opinions, which they further use to politically classify the text. Moreover, a well used corpus for this purpose is the Bitterlemons blog, where Israeli and Palestinian editors write their opinions about various issues. An example of work in the above-mentioned corpus is [17], which focuses on bias on a topical level. Parliament speeches and politicians' public statements are opinionated as well. [18] uses US congress speeches and ideological books to identify biased sentences with recursive neural networks and Sim et al. [19] infer the ideological portions in the speeches of US presidential candidates, by using a hidden Markov model. 2.5 Bias in News Articles Regarding bias detection speci cally in news articles, [27] demonstrates the char- acteristics of 100 English-speaking news outlets in terms of gatekeeping ,coverage andstatement bias. In addition, the framework \QUOTUS" [20] extracts politi- cians' quotations from news articles and blog posts that are used to construct an outlet-to-quote matrix. The authors utilize this matrix to predict whether an outlet will report a quote or not and to also discover the latent dimensions of political bias. Park et. al [21] deploy user comments to predict the political posi- tion of Naver News in South Korea, inspired by the idea that a liberal supporter will leave a negative comment to a conservative article and a positive one to an article that favors the liberals. Similarly, [24] examines whether user reactions on news opinion articles are positive or negative in order to classify the articles as liberal or conservative. Furthermore, Dallmann et al. [22] and Krestel et al. [26] cope with the bias detection problem in German, with the latter comparing parliament speeches and online news sources for this purpose. Finally, [25] quan- ti es the media slant by building a reference network to examine the citations of the 111th US Congress in social and news media. 3 Identifying Political Bias in News Articles In this PhD thesis we are interested in revealing the di erent patterns that newspapers follow in their choice of language and the news story selection that potentially favor a political party. These tasks are concurrently important for the readers and the writers, but are also challenging since newspapers are not a typical example of opinionated and subjective text, such as product reviews. Initially, we examine selection bias, that is in terms of partisan politics how much space a newspaper dedicates for each political party. We examine how often politicians are mentioned and how often politicians are quoted in news articles. We also consider all political articles from the examined outlets and don't focus only on a single topic, politician or term of oce. On the contrary, related work in [20] is only interested in quotes from Barack Obama both in newspapers and blogs, while [17] and [7] analyze the Bitterlemons political blog, which only refers to Israeli-Palestinian con icts. We currently analyze the UK politicians' mentions and quotations in two UK newspapers during the period of 2000{2015. 3.1 Datasets Our  rst dataset is the online newspaper Guardian .Guardian's articles are available online from 1996 till today. We currently use the politics section, since inGuardian's case it contains various worldwide and UK political news. In this way, we are also able to exclude irrelevant topics to us, such as lifestyle or sports articles. The total number of articles in the period 1996{2015 is 197,668. The next dataset is the online newspaper Telegraph , which is also a well known UK media outlet. The Telegraph provides an archive with its past ar- ticles from 2000 to 2015 without explicit sections. In order to obtain political articles about the world and the UK, we examined the url patterns of the articles and crawled the ones that refer to politics ,UKand world news, and  nancial issues. The news articles are 281,706 from 2000 till 2015. This is the common period between the two news corpora as well, hence we focus our analysis on this timeframe. Besides UK newspapers, the third dataset, which is not yet fully exploited, is the collection of the UK parliament speeches from 1934 until 2015. Up to now, we have used this corpus to extract the politicians' names and parties from it, so that we search for them in the news articles. All datasets are analyzed (tokenized, stemmed) and indexed in an ElasticSearch instance, which is a search engine that enables full text search. Stopwords are also removed. 3.2 Ongoing Analysis Our intuition is that if a newspaper mentions a party more frequently than the others, then this party is considered more signi cant, and thus their political orientation may be similar. Likewise, if a newspaper quotes more politicians' statements from the conservatives than from the liberals, they might share the same beliefs with the  rst ones. To this end, we count the times each party is mentioned in the news articles, namely sum the politicians' references for each party over time. This experiment is two-fold, since we use both text search and named entity search. The text search is performed in Elastic search, while the named entity recognition is performed by IBM Alchemy API, which provides us also with the direct quotations assigned to the discovered entities. Direct quotations refer to the case when media repeat what someone said using exactly the words they used, usually included in quotation marks. Furthermore, the fact that a politician Xis mentioned in a news article doesn't necessarily mean that Xis presented favorably. It could occur that a politician Ycriticizes Xin his/her speech and the newspaper quotes Y's state- ment. It could also hold that the newspaper criticizes Xnegatively for his/her actions. According to [1] most newspapers cover a wide variety of issues concerning all parties. However, the di erent parties are criticized disproportionately. Me- dia generally point out the errors of all parties, but particularly the republican outlets portray the Democratic party in a more negative manner and vice versa. On the contrary, [2] and [3] discover in news articles strong political media bias and partisan language respectively. As indicated in [20], given the topic of pres- ident Obama and the timeframe of his tenure, their latent semantic analysis on numerous English-speaking outlets reveals that the media sources group by their ideology, whether they declared their political beliefs, and whether they are local or international media. Nonetheless, it shouldn't be disregarded that [20] considers both news media and social media (blogs, social networks etc.) in their analysis, with the latter presenting much more bias slant. In addition, the authors identify Barack Obama's quotations in the text by searching for speci c parts of his speeches, instead of extracting reported speech from it. 4 Experiments Our  rst experiment is to quantify the mentions of all UK politicians in Guardian and Telegraph from 2000 till 2015 using ElasticSearch . We perform phrase queries with the politicians'  rst and last names and search in the title, sub- title, body and image captions of the articles. 4.1 Politicians' mentions The search results for the Guardian and the Telegraph are shown in Figures 1a and 1b, respectively. Regarding the most mentioned parties, the red curve corresponds to the Labour , whereas the blue one to the Conservatives . It is apparent that both newspapers discuss more about the current governments than the remaining parties and the two above-mentioned curves cross at the general election year of 2010. That is, both parties are mentioned more during their term | 1997-2010 in the case of Labour and 2010-2015 for the Conservatives . (a) Politicians' mentions in Guardian  (b) Politicians' mentions in Telegraph Although the above pattern holds for both outlets, the di erence between the mentions of Labour and the Conservative party in Guardian is signi cantly higher compared to Telegraph . Namely, in 1a until 2010 Labour is discussed almost two times more than the Conservatives . The latter is in accordance with Guardian 's Wikipedia page stating that its politician alignment is centre-left. However, in 1b while Labour is not exceptionally discussed during Tony Blair's term (1997-2007), the references grow rapidly during Gordon Brown's tenure (2007-2010). As 1b also depicts, the Conservatives ' mentions are increasing dur- ing Gordon Brown's term as well. This is an interesting discovery that motivates us to analyze further the sentiment around the mentions, as this will indicate whether the parties' references are positive, negative or neutral. (a) Normalized politicians' mentions in Guardian (b) Normalized politicians' mentions in Telegraph Since the absolute number of mentions can vary extremely among di erent parties and di erent time periods, we further present the above results nor- malized. 2a and 2b depict the previous results, that is the annual politicians' mentions (summed for each party), but now normalized by the total number of mentions of all politicians per year. Initially, we still observe that the discussion dominating party changes from Labour toConservative in 2010, as the Conser- vatives won in the general elections. Additionally, it is notable that the previous general elections have a ected the media coverage as well. Particularly in the Telegraph the two major parties' curves approach each other in 2005, while in theGuardian this phenomenon is more apparent in 2001. Apart from analyzing the relative mentions of di erent parties, it is also bene cial to compare the media coverage with respect to the vote shares of the parties. Namely, examine whether all parties are represented by the news outlets according to their popularity. One can argue that an unbiased outlet is expected to report political events in accordance with the vote shares of the elected parties. As  gure 3 presents, the Liberal Democrats increased their vote share from 18.3 in 2000 to 22.0 in 2005. This switch is not illustrated neither in 2a and nor in 2b, since the relative mentions of the Liberal Democrats during this period remain almost stable to 0.1. Moreover, the votes of the above-mentioned party dropped from 23.0 in 2010 to 7.9 in 2015 (during the coalition agreement with the Conservatives ). The latter cannot be concluded in neither of the two examined news outlets. Fig. 3: UK general election vote share according to Wikipedia Given that simple text search is not as reliable as discovering the named entities in the text, we further plot the UK politicians discovered as named entities in the news articles. For the rest of this section we will focus on the Guardian , as only these results are currently available and the reported results refer to absolute counts. As shown in 4 the above-mentioned pattern of citing mostly the current government's politicians is also apparent in the case of the named entity search. Labour is consistently more cited until the general elections in 2010, when the Conservatives begin to dominate the discussions. Figure 4 also presents the highest number of entity mentions for both parties in 2015, when the latest general election was held on 7th May. Furthermore, although the Liberals 's mentions rise in 2010, they continuously drop for the next  ve years and only increase during the latest general election year. Since the named entity extraction task is challenging on its own, we will also use the Standford CoreNLP tool to ensure the completeness of the entity set and incorporate co-reference resolution into our approach. Fig. 4: Politicians' entities in Guardian 4.2 Politicians' quotations Another possible indication of a newspaper's ideological perspective is its quoting pattern. Namely, the number of times media quote a party in general, or given a certain topic. To this end, we extract the politicians' quotes in Guardian , as shown in 5. Labour 's quotes in 2004 are three times more than the ones from the Conservatives and twelve times higher compared to the Liberals . Similarly to the previous experiments, 2010 is the  rst year that the Conservatives outperform Labour in terms of quotations and they maintain their prevalence until 2015. Fig. 5: Quotes from politicians in Guardian Finally, since the Alchemy API discovers only direct quotations, our next step is to use an existing approach from the literature, such as [28] and [33], in order to consider indirect speech as well. 5 Conclusion and Future work In this work, we are interested in identifying political bias in news media. To- wards this direction, we consider di erent indicators for bias, that is the number of times media mention and quote politicians from di erent parties. We argue that if a newspaper discuss more a certain political party or group of parties belonging to a certain political direction, this behavior might indicate the news- paper's political beliefs. Our motivation stems from the fact that existing ap- proaches are mainly manual. In the case of automatic approaches, the problem is tackled mostly for opinionated blog posts and the solutions focus on single topics or politicians. Quotation extraction from news articles is also part of our overall goal. That is why, whether media quote opposing sides of arguments or not is an indicator of how well informed the general public is. Preliminary results on UK newspapers show that media tend to cover more stories from the current governing party and generally from the most popular parties. Coverage patterns vary in di erent election periods and among di erent newspapers. The latter grows our interest of analyzing these patterns in terms of the topics and sentiments involved. The comparison between the party mentions and the party vote shares shows that coverage is not always compliant with the votes that a party receives. Regarding our future goals, an interesting initial task would be to use a topic model and discover the topics that are discussed both in the media and the parliament. This would feature the issues they all concentrate on and point out the common ones. Especially for the media outlets, we will use Mallet's LDA implementation and then we will examine the quoting patterns in each detected topic. To this end, the quote-to-outlet graph [20] is a concept of interest to us, especially in a temporal manner for observing how this graph evolves over time. Measuring the probability that the Guardian will quote in the future for instance theLiberal party for education issues and the Labour party for the health care issues would be an interesting achievement. Subsequently, the readers will have an insight in the media's political leaning and we will be able to recommend a set of news outlets that together provide a complete overview for a certain topic. Moreover, political media bias detection consists of many aspects apart from selection bias, such as sentiment analysis and opinion mining in the text. We aim at detecting the expressed sentiment both around a politician's mentions [30] and in a complete news article [29]. Given the sentiment expressed by the media for the politicians, and inspired by the signed networks [31], we plan to capture these sentiment values in a signed graph. Namely, a bipartite graph G where the nodes Vare outlets and politicians, while the edges Edenote the sentiment that outlets show when they discuss a politician. A positive edge sign means positive language towards a person, while a negative sign refers to the case that an outlet criticizes negatively a person. Using the principles of status andbalance theory, one could attempt to predict the sign of an unobserved edge, that is the sentiment an outlet will show about a politician. Finally, our general goal is to analyze online media in order to observe how information and opinions travel and change among individuals. Di erent enti- ties, for instance politicians, journalists, readers, commenters, etc. play di erent roles in the information di usion and contribute to the people's in uence. Since media's choice to promote certain pieces of information or persons shape general public's opinion, selection bias detection in political news is our  rst step in our analysis. Graph-based approaches such as the above-mentioned, seem appropri- ate to capture the dynamics of the involved entities. Namely, which politicians' quotes media report, how negatively or positively are political events described by media and by extension perceived by readers. References 1. Budak C., Goel Sh. and Rao M.: Fair and Balanced? Quantifying Media Bias through Crowdsourced Content Analysis. Public Opinion Quaterly, Vol. 80, Special Issue, p. 250{271 (2016) 2. Groseclose T. and Milyo J.: A measure of media bias. The Quartely Journal of Economics 120, Issue 4, p. 1191{1237 (2005) 3. Gentzkow M.: What drives media slant? Evidence from us daily newspapers. Econo- metrica, Volume 78, Issue 1, p. 35{71 (2010) 4. Recasens M., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil C. and Jurafsky D.: Linguistic Models for Analyzing and Detecting Biased Language. Proceedings of ACL (2013) 5. Yano T., Resnik Ph. and Smith N.: Shedding (a Thousand Points of) Light on Biased Language. Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon's Mechanical Turk (2010) 6. Jelveh Z., Kogut B. and Naidu S.: Detecting Latent Ideology in Expert Text: Evi- dence From Academic Papers in Economics. Proceedings of EMNLP (2014) 7. Lin W., Wilson Th., Wiebe J. and Hauptmann A.: Which Side are You on? Identi- fying Perspectives at the Document and Sentence. Proceedings of CoNLL (2006) 8. Clercq O., Hertling S., Hoste V., Ponzetto S. and Paulheim H.: Identifying Disputed Topics in the News. Proceedings of the LD4KD Workshop at ECML/PKDD (2014) 9. Park S., KyungSoon L. and Song J.: Contrasting Opposing Views of News Articles on Contentious Issues Souneil. Proceedings of ACL : HCT (2011) 12. Cohen R. and Ruths D.: Classifying Political Orientation on Twitter: It's Not Easy! Proceedings of ICWSM (2013) 13. Fang A., Ounis I., Habel Ph., Macdonald C. and Limsopatham N.: Topic-centric Classi cation of Twitter User's Political Orientation. Proceedings of ACL (2015) 15. Jiang M. and Argamon Sh.: Exploiting subjectivity analysis in blogs to improve political leaning categorization. Proceedings of SIGIR (2008) 17. Xing E. and Ahmed E.: Staying Informed: Supervised and Semi-Supervised Multi- view Topical Analysis of Ideological Perspective. Proceedings of EMNLP (2010) 18. Iyyer M., Enns P., Boyd-Graber J. and Resnik Ph.: Political Ideology Detection Using Recursive Neural Networks. Proceedings of ACL (2014) 19. Sim Y., Acree B., Gross J. and Smith N.: Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches. Proceedings of EMNLP (2013) 20. Niculae V., Suen C., Zhang J., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil C., Leskovec J.: QUO- TUS: The Structure of Political Media Coverage as Revealed by Quoting Patterns. Proceedings of WWW (2015) 21. Park S., Ko M., Kim J., Liu Y. and Song J.: The Politics of Comments: Pre- dicting Political Orientation of News Stories with Commenters Sentiment Patterns. Proceedings of CSCW (2011) 22. Dallmann A., Lemmerich F., Zoller D. and Hotho A.: Media Bias in German Online Newspapers. Proceedings of ACM HyperText (2015) 24. Zhou D., Resnik P. and Mei Q.: Classifying the Political Leaning of News Articles and Users from User Votes. Proceedings of ICWSM (2011) 25. Lin Y., Bagrow J. and Lazer D.: Quantifying Bias in Social and Mainstream Media. ACM SIGWEB Newsletter (2012) 26. Krestel R., Wall A. and Wolfgang N.: Treehugger or Petrolhead? Proceedings of WWW (2012) 27. Saez-Trumper D., Castillo C. and Lalmas M.: Social media news communities: gatekeeping, coverage, and statement bias. Proceedings of CIKM (2013) 28. Pareti S., O 'Keefe T., Konstas I., Curran J. and Koprinska I.: Automatically Detecting and Attributing Indirect Quotations. Proceedings of ACL (2013) 29. Socher R., Perelygin A., Wu Y., Chuang J., Manning C., Ng A. and Potts C.: Recursive Deep Models for Semantic Compositionality Over a Sentiment Treebank. Proceedings of EMNLP (2013) 30. Engonopoulos N., Lazaridou A., Paliouras G. and Chandrinos K.: ELS: a word- level method for entity-level sentiment analysis. Proceedings of WIMS (2011) 31. West R., Paskov H., Leskovec J. and Potts C.: Exploiting Social Network Structure for Person-to-Person Sentiment Analysis. Proceedings of TACL (2014) 33. Scheible Ch., Klinger R. and Pad S.: Model Architectures for Quotation Detection. Proceedings of ACL (2016)