 Politics, information and the urban bias Sumon Majumdara,*, Anandi Manib, Sharun W. Mukandc aDepartment of Economics, Queen’ s University, Kingston, ON, Canada K7L 3N6 bDepartment of Economics, Williams College, Fernald House, Williamstown, MA 01267, USA cDepartment of Economics, Tufts University, Braker Hall, Medford, MA 02155, USA Received 1 August 2002; accepted 1 August 2003 Available online Abstract Governments in many LDCs skew public resources towards urban sectors, despite a majority of citizens residing in rural areas. This paper develops a novel political argument for this urban- bias phenomenon in a framework where all voters, rural and urban, have equal voice, but differ in their access to information. We argue that this difference is sufficient to give governments anincentive to inefficiently over-allocate resources towards urban areas. The bias is shown to worsen during adverse economic times, leading to increased migration. We also examine how voter informativeness affects efficiency of the electoral process in weeding out incompetentgovernments.D2004 Elsevier B.V . All rights reserved. JEL classification: O18; H41; D72; R23 Keywords: Urban bias; Information; Heterogeneous electorate; Migration ‘‘The most important class conflict in the poor countries of the world today is not between labor and capital. Nor is it between foreign and national interests. It is betweenrural classes and urban classes....Scarce investment, instead of going into water-pumpsto grow rice is wasted on urban motorways. Scarce human skills administer, not cleanvillage wells and agricultural extension services, but world boxing championships inshowpiece stadia.’’—Michael Lipton (p1, 1977) in Why Poor People Stay Poor: Urban Bias in World Development . 0304-3878/$ - see front matter D2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2003.08.003* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-613-5332274; fax: +1-613-5336668.E-mail address: sumon@qed.econ.queensu.ca (S. Majumdar).www.elsevier.com/locate/econbaseJournal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 1. Introduction In many developing countries, public resources are often skewed in favor of urban areas, despite the fact that urban residents make up only a small fraction of the totalpopulation. This observation of an ‘urban bias’ in resource allocation was first made byLipton (1977) in his seminal work on urbanization in developing countries. Twenty-five years later, the issue is still an important one. According to the Rural Poverty Report (2001) , over 70% of the world’s poor live in rural areas, and even in 2025, over 60% of the poor are likely to be of rural origin. In this paper, we examine the incentives of agovernment with electoral imperatives, in distributing resources between the urban andrural sectors, and ask the following question: Why may a government in a country with apredominantly rural population have an incentive to skew resources away from the ruralsector towards the urban one? Exploring this issue helps address some of the factors thataffect urbanization and migration in developing countries. An examination of rural–urban differences in the provision of almost any public good in LDCs, reveals striking disparities in favor of urban areas (see Table 1 in Appendix C). 1 These disparities may arise for several reasons. For one, such urban–rural disparities may well be partly efficient (at least for some public goods) and arise due to a lower cost ofproviding urban public goods (see Arnott and Gersovitz, 1986 ). On the other hand, Lipton (1977) andBates (1981) argue that at least part of this disparity arises due to the influence and lobbying power of the urban elite. In their view, more effective urban lobbying resultsin an inefficient amount of resources being allocated towards urban areas, in line with thepreferences of the urban elite. 2While lobbying factors are more likely to play a role in influencing government policy towards a relatively small, cohesive group of citizenry in the form of subsidies, price controls or tariff protection, the urban-bias phenomenonappears much more pervasive. Many public services such as basic health clinics,subsidized primary education, access to water and sanitation seem less likely to attractactive lobbying efforts by any focused lobby group. What distinguishes our approach from the explanations outlined above then, is that we focus on addressing the urban-bias question in a non-lobbying framework, where all agents (be they in rural or urban areas) have equal voice. Thus, the emphasis of our analysis is on precisely the wide spectrum of public goods where simple lobbying factors are less likely to be at work. In particular, this paper focuses on a distinct mechanism,namely, the difference in the information sets of urban and rural residents. In ourargument, information plays a functional role—it enables citizens to draw an accuratelink between observed public good outcomes and the role of the government’s ability inbringing about those outcomes. Urban residents have an information advantage that may 2This lobbying based explanation is further amplified by Ades and Glaeser (1995) andGlaeser (1999) , who make the case that the government may have such an incentive not only due to effective urban lobbying, but alsodue to its fear of being overthrown by a coup (restricted, by assumption, to occur only in urban areas).1As argued by Williamson (1988) , despite the abundance of suggestive evidence for the presence of an urban bias, there is a lack of careful empirical work on it. One reason for this may well be the difficulty in assessing the ‘efficient’ levels of public good provision, due to differences in costs across sectors and regions.Even the ‘optimal’ per capita outlays may vary, depending on the nature of the public good in question.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 138 arise due to several factors: greater average wealth, higher education, better access to the media as well as a stronger urban focus in media coverage. Even if both rural and urbanresidents observe public good outcomes equally well, this information advantage impliesthat urban residents are better positioned to evaluate the role of the government’s ability inachieving a given outcome. 3In our political economy framework, with a government interested in getting re-elected, it is this advantage of urban residents that may result in anurban bias in the allocation of public resources. In our benchmark case, we analyze government resource allocation, when both rural and urban public good outcomes are affected by sector-specific shocks, as well as by the government’s administrative competence. Differences in resource allocation arise due torural–urban differences in the observability of these sector-specific shocks. For example,rural residents may be relatively poorly positioned to ascertain the relative importance ofgovernment neglect versus other exogenous shocks in engendering a low output in ruralareas. In contrast, urban residents, being better educated and with the support of an activemedia as a watchdog, are likely to hold a guilty government culpable much moreaccurately and faster. 4Realizing this, a government that wishes to retain power (i.e. maximize its chances of getting re-elected) will tend to use a disproportionate share of the resources in generating more favorable urban outcomes. Thus, the electoral imperatives ofthe government translate the information advantage of urban areas into a bias in resourceallocation toward such areas, even though they contain a minority of citizen-voters. Our analysis suggests that this bias is likely to be strongest when the government is relativelynew and not yet politically well entrenched. However, being better informed is not always advantageous to the urban resident. Under some conditions, this greater information availability can also serve to reverse the skew in resource allocation. We observe this on analyzing a version of the preceding model with economy-wide shocks (as against sector-specific shocks). Such a global shockcould be, for instance, an economy-wide recession triggered by a world-wide financialcrisis, an external threat, or a change in the country’s credit-rating. Typically, urbanresidents tend to be more aware of such adverse shocks than rural voters. Now, we showthat the effect of such information asymmetry is that any urban bias in resource allocationis reduced under good economic conditions and exacerbated in bad times. During goodtimes, a higher output is appropriately discounted by the informed urban voter as being due to a favorable exogenous shock (rather than due to government competence), but not so by the uninformed rural voter. Therefore, in such times, the government has more togain by improving rural outcomes and it does so by devoting more resources to the ruralsector. In contrast, a negative shock results in the opposite effect—it increases the bias in 3To take an example, various factors can cause an electricity shortage. It could be low electricity generation because of labor strikes, poor transmission of power across badly maintained power lines, poor demand forecasts by the government or an unexpected demand shock, such as an increase in the international price of coal. Ourassumption here is a simple one: the urban resident is better informed and hence better placed to evaluate whetherthe electricity shortage is due to the government’s shortcomings, or because of trade unions that prevent public sector reform, or just simply an unexpected surge in the price of inputs. 4For example, one of the main reasons cited for a dense network of food provision centers in urban areas under thePublic Distribution System in India is (thanks to an active media presence in urban areas) the negative publicity that food shortage in urban areas causes, relative to that in (media-poor) rural areas (see Howes and Jha, 1992 ).S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 139 resource allocation in favor of urban areas. Suggestive evidence from the Philippines provides support for this prediction. Examining immunization coverage in the Philippinesfollowing the negative global shock of the Asian Financial crisis of 1998, we find that thedrop in coverage was much bigger in the least informed provinces than in the moreinformed ones. It is interesting to note that our structure also provides a framework to study the effects of voter informativeness on the efficacy of a democratic political system. As is well recognized, elections play an important role not only in controlling moral hazard on the part of incumbent governments, but also serve the purpose of weeding out incompetentgovernments and retaining efficient ones. 5While the moral hazard aspect of the problem manifests itself in the form of an urban-bias, given the heterogeneity in information setsacross voters, the framework developed in this paper is also well suited to deal with theimportant role of information and elections in mitigating the adverse selection problem.Thus, we ask the question: if voters have more information available about the economicenvironment, will the political system become more efficient in weeding out low ability incumbents? Somewhat strikingly, our analysis suggests that this need not always be the case. Under some circumstances, an increase in information about the economicenvironment makes the relatively less informed voters put more weight on their ownimperfect observations in determining the political outcome. This may outweigh the effectof an increase in the information’s precision so that over a range, the political system mayin fact become less efficient in weeding out incompetent politicians, despite an increase inoverall information. A bias in public good provision also has implications for individual migration decisions. Given that citizens’ concern with the quality of public services often influence their choice of residence, our analysis makes several points relevant to the literature onrural–urban migration. First, it highlights the simple, but relatively neglected fact thatrural–urban migration may be driven not just by differences in employment opportu-nities (Harris and Todaro, 1970) , but also by a politically induced bias in public good provision. Second, it predicts that migration rates and levels of urbanization are likely toincrease under adverse conditions in the economy, due to an exacerbation of the urban-bias in such situations. Both these predictions fit well with the phenomenon of ‘urbanization without growth’ as observed in many developing countries in the last few decades (see the World Development Report, 2000; Fay and Opal, 2000 ). The paper is laid out as follows. Section 2 describes the benchmark model, demonstrates the basic result of a bias in sectoral resource allocation, and also examines the efficacy ofthe political system in throwing out incompetent governments and reelecting competentones. Section 3 analyzes the effects of economy-wide shocks on the direction andmagnitude of the bias in resource allocation. Section 4.1 discusses the implications ofour analysis for rural–urban migration. Section 4.2 outlines various mechanisms that may drive a wedge in information availability between the rural and urban residents, and also provides some supportive evidence. Finally, Section 5 concludes. 5The relationship between information availability due to the media and the moral hazard issue has been examined in a developing country context by Besley and Burgess (2002) , who use data from India to study government responsiveness to information.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 140 2. The benchmark model We construct a stylized political economy model of sectoral resource allocation. We begin by describing the key elements of our model. 2.1. Sectoral output and government performance An incumbent government provides two sector-specific public goods, one each for the rural and the urban sectors. The output in each sector is a stochastic function of the public resources allocated by the government to it, the ability of the government, as well as thequantity of some (exogenous) regional input. For instance, agricultural output is not onlyaffected by exogenous region-specific inputs such as rainfall, but also by the size ofgovernmental resource outlay for public projects such as irrigation. Further, the effectivenessof such projects is likely to be a function of not just the total resource outlay, but also theability of the government for ‘appropriate’ project design through the efficient marshaling,harnessing and deployment of these resources. Similarly, the urban industrial sector may be affected not only by exogenous oil price shocks, for example, but also by resources allocated towards ‘export promotion activities’ as well as the government’s ability in identifying andpromoting the ‘right’ industries (i.e. those with the maximum export potential). To capture these various elements that affect sector specific output, we assume that output of sector j, denoted by y j, is given by: yj¼sgþfðejÞþhj jafRural ;Urban gð 1Þ where sgis the ability of the government, ejis the resources allocated to sector jandhjis the quantity of some region specific input. The effectiveness of resources allocated isgiven by the function f(e) which is assumed to be concave and satisfying the standard Inada conditions. The region-specific input h jis assumed to be normally distributed with mean 0 and variance rj2. The ability of the incumbent government is denoted by sg, which is assumed to be the same for the provision of both goods.6Thus, ceteris paribus, both rural and urban voters would prefer more able governments. The benefit of this simple structure is that it implies that the marginal product of public resources is identical in both sectors, and therefore the first-best allocation would involveequal division of resources between the two sectors, i.e. e rFB=euFB.7As we will see below, 7This equality in resource distribution is of course due to the assumption that the effectiveness of resources, f(e), is the same in both sectors. Again, this is made primarily for exposition. If we instead assumed (as in Arnott and Gersovitz, 1986 ), that the marginal effectiveness of resources is lower in the rural sector than in the urban sector, i.e. frV(e)<fuV(e), then the first best allocation would involve erFB<euFB. As will become evident in our analysis below, even in this case, a government interested in enhancing its chances of re-election will bias its allocation of resources er* and eu* (Proposition 1) such that er*<erFB<euFB<e *u.6Two aspects of the above structure maybe worth pointing out. First, the assumption that the government’s ability sgis equally effective in determining the rural as well as the urban outcome, is made primarily for simplicity of exposition. There is no qualitative change in the results if we assume instead, only a positive correlation betweenthe government’s ability in providing rural goods and urban goods. Secondly, we have assumed no complementaritybetween the government’s ability s gand resources e. Again, the general favor of the argument is unchanged even if the production function incorporated a complementarity between the two [say, for example, yj=sgf(ej)+hj].S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 141 political imperatives on the part of the incumbent can lead to a bias in sectoral resource allocation. 2.2. The information structure and voter inference Governance is a multi-faceted task with unique features and requires a variety of skills. Not surprisingly, ex-ante it is difficult to determine with much reliability how adept a particular politician is going to be at performing the multifarious tasks involved in running a government. Hence we assume, as is standard in career concerns models,8 that the true ability sgof the incumbent in the provision of public goods is not known by anyone, including the incumbent. All agents are assumed to share a common prior thatthe government’s talent s gis drawn from a normal distribution with mean ¯sgand variance rs2. Even though the government’s ability is not known ex-ante, citizens can update their estimate of it through their observations of the public outputs. A higher output leads to a more favorable perception of the government’s ability, and hence to a higher chance of retaining power. The key feature of the career-concerns formulation, as can be seen in theproduction function (Eq. (1)), is that resources e jare a substitute for ability sg. This implies that by increasing output, through an increased allocation of resources, the government canskew the voter’s perception of governmental competence in its favor. Of course, whenthere are multiple sectors vying for scarce resources, the gains from such allocation arehigher in those sectors where this inference process is the sharpest. This is the heart of ourargument: differences in visibility lead to differences in inference; hence, a government that is interested in maximizing its public perception will tend to allocate more resources to sectors in which the inference process is better. At the beginning of the period, the incumbent government allocates resources e={e r,eu} to the two sectors, out of a fixed total budget B¯. The precise sectoral allocation is not observable to the citizens. While standard in such models, this assumption isperhaps particularly defensible in the context of developing countries, where corruptionand lack of transparency mean that actual amounts spent are not often publicinformation, and it is common to find governments both under- and over-shooting planned expenditures. Nature then chooses the level of local inputs h uandhrfor the two regional inputs, and the output yuandyrin the two sectors is realized as a combination of the government’s ability, the region-specific input and the resources allocated, according to the productionfunction Eq. (1). We assume that while all residents can see the output of both regions, those living in a particular sector have better knowledge about the region-specific input h jin their sector. More specifically, we assume that while none of the rural residents can observe the urban 8For classic examples of the career concerns framework in a managerial effort-provision context, see Holmstrom (1982) andDewatripont et al. (1999) .Persson and Tabellini (2000, Chapter 4) provide a useful overview of the relevance of a career concerns framework to address political economy issues. From a technicalviewpoint, this assumption of the true ability s gbeing not known ex ante by the incumbent, avoids signaling issues in the model.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 142 input hu, a fraction puof urban residents know the true level of the urban input hu. Similarly, a proportion prof rural residents know the true level of hr, but do not observe hu. Therefore, while non-residents know the distribution of the local inputs in the two regions,they do not observe their actual realizations. 9Due to this difference in knowledge about local input levels, urban and rural residents differ in their inference about the government’sability, even when they observe the same outcomes. For example, a decrease in infantmortality in an area may be observed identically by rural and urban residents, but whetherthis was due to the effort of some local non-governmental organizations rather than the competence of the government, is likely to be better known to local residents. As a result, this observation of an improvement in neonatal health would be interpreted quitedifferently by local residents than by non-residents. 2.3. The political structure Having described the structure of the economy, we now turn to the objective of the government in power. The political structure here is simple and focuses on the incumbent government’s desire to remain in power, with the government’s objective being to maximize its chances of re-election. At the end of the period, the incumbent faces arandomly drawn challenger in an election. The success of the incumbent government, inthe face of such competition, will depend on first and most importantly, the citizens’perception of its ability (vis-a-vis that of the challenger) andsecond, the relative charisma of its leader. 10 Note that the output in both sectors is positively affected by the ability of the government in power. Further, as will be seen in the subsequent analysis (Proposition 1), a government’s resource allocation decision is not correlated with its underlying ability. Therefore, in choosing a government, all citizens would prefer to elect one of higherperceived ability. However, in addition, there is a further factor that determines politicaloutcomes. In particular, we follow Rogoff (1990) and assume that voters also care about 10Given our emphasis on elections, it may seem that our analysis is restricted to societies which are democratic. That is not quite accurate; our framework can with (minor) adjustments be adapted to non-democratic societies. The crucial assumption that has to be maintained is that the probability of an incumbent retaining poweris an increasing function of his/her perceived ability. Therefore, so long as coups/revolts are more likely against agovernment that is perceived to be of low ability, our analysis would remain relevant even for non-democratic societies.9In our benchmark model, we deliberately emphasize the role of rural–urban differences in information about the (exogenous) regional input rather than any of the other variables. This is because of two reasons. Firstly,if we interpret y randyuas public services in an area, we believe that a priori there is no reason to believe why a rural citizen should not be able to observe his own predicament and the quantity of the public good as well as an urban resident, for public services are generally experienced individually. On the other hand, typically a myriad of inputs affect the overall level of the public service, and each individual has little incentive to acquire informationabout such inputs, except in that they may be related to other activities he or she is involved in. Thus, it is perhapsmore natural to focus on asymmetry of information about inputs rather than about output. We do this by focusing on distortions arising solely due to informational differences about the sector specific input, while keeping all else between the urban and rural sector symmetric. Secondly, in a subsequent section (viz. Section 3) we examine howthe implications of our theory change when we consider informational differences about some global shock rather than informational differences about sector-specific shocks.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 143 an additional ‘charisma’ factor. This captures some non-economic aspects of the incumbent and the challenger such as articulateness, commitment to a social identity, oreven sense of humor of the candidates. Indeed, these non-economic characteristics maydiffer in the eyes of individual voters. We capture these aspects collectively with a variablecwhich we call the ‘charisma’ of a randomly drawn challenger, relative to the incumbent. For each voter, the challenger’s charisma (relative to that of the incumbent) is assumed tobe an independent draw from a uniform distribution over [ /C0c 0,c0], that is observed prior to the election. The ability of this challenger is expected to be the same as the ex ante ability of the incumbent viz. ¯sg. A citizen compares her own estimate of the incumbent government’s ability with ¯sg+c(which represents the talent plus relative charisma of the challenger), and votes to either retain or oust the incumbent depending on whichever value is higher.11The candidate who obtains a majority of the votes is the winner of the election. If we denote the fraction of the population living in rural areas by Nr, and that in urban areas by Nu, in most developing countries Nu< 0.5 < Nr. With the majority of the populace residing in rural areas and all having equal voice, the ‘median voter’ is usually a rural resident, and therefore it requires to be explained yet why resources get skewed in favor ofthe urban sector. 2.3.1. The timing We now summarize the timing of the above game. At the beginning of the period, the incumbent government chooses to allocate resources across the two sectors. Sectorspecific outputs are then realized. Residents in region jobserve the outputs in both sectors; a fraction p jalso observe their region-specific input hj. On the basis of the information available, voters make an assessment of the ability of the incumbentgovernment. The government then faces an election against a randomly drawn challenger.Prior to making his voting decision, each voter realizes a charisma factor c, that determines the relative charisma of the challenger vis-a-vis the incumbent. Finally, at the end of theperiod, elections take place and the politician that obtains a majority of the votes is electedto power. How do these aspects of the political structure, as well as citizens’ information and inference process affect the government’s resource allocation across the two sectors? To address this question, we next analyze the equilibrium of this game. 2.4. Equilibrium We now turn to examining governmental decision making in allocating its total budget B¯between the two sectors. The crucial element in this model is that a higher output boosts public perception about the government’s ability. Since output is a function of both ability (which is unknown ex ante) and resources, a government can use resource allocation to influence the level of output and thereby bolster its reputation. The differences in our 11From a modeling point of view, the ‘charisma’ factor makes the probability of re-election a smooth stochastic function of the perceived ability of the incumbent government. This ensures that slight changes in perceived ability will not result in discontinuous jumps in the probability of getting elected.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 144 approach here are two: First, we have a multiplicity of goods, and second, there is heterogeneity in the information sets of the rural and urban electorate. Let us now examinethe nature of equilibrium in this game. We do this backwards, starting from the end of the period. Suppose the realizations of the urban and rural outputs, and the urban and rural regional inputs have been y u,yr andhu,hr, respectively. Note that among the urban voters, while all observe yuandyr, only a fraction pualso get to see the region-specific input hu. Let us call them as ‘‘informed’’ urban voters. Likewise, in the rural population, while all residents observe yuandyr, only a fraction prof the voters are informed in that they get to observe hr. We will refer to those voters who see only yuand yr(but not the regional inputs) as ‘‘uninformed’’. Now consider a voter’s decision rule. Let us denote by E[sgjinformation set] the voter’s estimate of the incumbent government’s ability based on her information about the urbanand rural public goods, y u,yr, and about the region-specific input hj(if available). Such a voter will vote to re-elect the incumbent only if E[sgjinformation set]> ¯sg+c. Consider a particular group of voters. Since charisma cis distributed uniformly over [/C0c0,c0], the fraction of this group who vote to re-elect the incumbent is given by E½sgjinformation set /C138/C0¯sgþc0 2c0.12We have four groups of voters in the population: (a) informed rural and urban voters, whose information sets consist of ( yu,yr,hu) and ( yu,yr,hr), respectively, and (b) uninformed rural and urban voters, whose information sets containonly y uandyr. Thus, in the final electoral calculation, given realizations ( yu,yr;hu,hr), the incumbent will win the election only if it captures a majority of the votes: NupuEðsgAyu;yr;huÞ/C0¯sgþc0 2c0þð1/C0puÞEðsgAyu;yrÞ/C0¯sgþc0 2c0/C20/C21 þNrprEðsgAyu;yr;hrÞ/C0¯sgþc0 2c0þð1/C0prÞEðsgAyu;yrÞ/C0¯sgþc0 2c0/C20/C21 >1 2ð2Þ Any government interested in retaining power would like to ensure that a majority of the voting public forms a favorable posterior assessment of its ability sg. To see how this is affected by the allocation of resources, we need to derive the expressions for the rural andurban residents’ ex post assessment of the government’s talent in Eq. (2) above. Incomputing this, we make use of the fact that all our random variables are normallydistributed. This considerably eases computation: Not only are the posteriors normallydistributed, but also the following property of Bayesian updating with normal distributionsyields relatively tractable expressions. (This property is derived in Appendix A; also see DeGroot, 1970 .) In particular, if y=s+h, where sfN(¯s,r s2) and hfN(0,rh2), then the distribution of sconditional on observing yis also normal with meanhs¯sþhhy hsþhhand variance 1 hsþhh, where hs=1 /rs2andhh=1 /rh2are the precisions of the two distributions. Consider an informed urban voter. She observes yuandyr, as well as the actual level of the urban input hu. If she expects that the government’s allocation of resources to 12This fraction is one if E[sgjinformation set] /C0¯sg>c0and is zero if E[sgjinformation set] /C0¯sg</C0c0. These cases are taken into consideration in the formal proof of Proposition 1 given in Appendix B.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 145 the urban sector is eu*, then she deduces with perfect precision that the government’s ability is sg¼yu/C0fðeu*Þ/C0hu ð3Þ Similarly, informed rural voters who observe the true level of the rural input hr, deduce that the government’s ability is sg¼yr/C0fðer*Þ/C0hr ð4Þ The equilibrium concept here is rational expectations equilibrium. Thus, the citizens’ expectations about resource allocation are realized, in equilibrium. The government expends resources to influence public perception, but in equilibrium, the net effect iszero. This can be seen from Eq. (3). For a given amount of urban resources e u, the right- hand side of Eq. (3) is sg+f(eu)/C0f(eu*). Thus from the government’s point of view, the marginal return to increasing resources to the urban sector is fV(eu); but in equilibrium, eu=eu*, and so the equilibrium effect is nil. Comparing Eqs. (3) and (4), one can see from the government’s objective, that the marginal return to increasing perceived talent amongthe informed voters (by increasing y j) is the same in both sectors. Next consider uninformed urban voters, i.e. those who do not see the regional input hu. In their case, observing either outcome yj,ja{U,R} is like observing the government’s talent with an error term of variance rj2(which is the variance of hj). Thus, this urban voter obtains two observations of the government’s talent, yuandyr, from two distributions with precisions hu=1 /ru2andhr=1 /rr2, respectively. Therefore, the mean of her posterior belief about the government’s ability is given by: ¯sghrþhuðyu/C0fðeu*ÞÞ þ hrðyr/C0fðer*ÞÞ hsþhuþhrð5Þ Here, the terms hH,huandhrare the precision of the different pieces of information, and thus constitute the weights on the prior and the realizations. The information set for theuninformed rural voter is the same as that of an uninformed urban voter, i.e. she tooobserves only y uandyr. Therefore, the mean of her posterior belief about the government’s talent is also given by Eq. (5). This posterior belief is increasing in both yuandyr; however, the marginal return to increasing yrishr/(hs+hu+hr), while that from raising yuishu/(hs+hu+hr). Therefore, if variance of the urban input huis lower than that of the rural input hr, it would imply a greater incentive on the part of the government to devote resources to increasing the urbanoutput y urather than increasing yr. Note that all of the above posterior beliefs are increasing in yuandyr, and therefore the government would like to distribute its given budget B¯between the two sectors so as to maximize its objective, as expressed in Eq. (2). Now, if euis the funds allocated to the urban sector, then the ex ante distribution of yuis normal with mean ¯sg+f(eu), and variance rs2+ru2; similarly, given an allocation erto the rural sector, yris normally distributed with mean ¯sg+f(er), and variance rs2+rr2. Using the expressions from Eqs. (3), (4) and (5), the government’s ex post reputation is alsoS. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 146 normally distributed (given that Eq. (2) is the sum of normally distributed variables); resource allocation between the two sectors affects only the mean l(er,eu)o ft h i s distribution. Thus, the government’s objective of maximizing its average ex postreputation amounts to a choice of e randeuso as to maximize l(er,eu). Are there factors that will bias the government’s optimal resource allocation in favor of either sector? Weaddress this question in Proposition 1 below. Proposition 1. For c 0large enough, an urban bias in government resource allocation for public goods arises (i.e. e u*>e uFB>erFB>er*) if: Nupu/C0Nrprþhu/C0hr hsþhuþhr½Nuð1/C0puÞþNrð1/C0prÞ/C138>0 where h u=1 /ru2and h r=1 /rr2, respectively . Even when the rural population is in a majority, a bias in resource allocation towards the minority urban sector is likely to occur if (i) the variability of the rural input, i.e. rr2,i s high or that of the urban input, i.e. ru2, is low, (ii) the fraction of informed urban voters, i.e. pu, is high or the fraction of informed rural voters, i.e. p r, is low, or (iii) the variability in the public perception about the government’s ability, i.e. rs2, is high (in the case when h u>hr). Proof. See Appendix B. 5 The above proposition summarizes conditions under which a government will tend to over-allocate resources to the urban sector. Notice that, as in other theories of voting withidentically informed voters, in our model too, a larger urban population share, N u, makes an urban bias more likely. Here however, even when the urban population is in a minority (i.e. for Nu<Nr), an urban bias can arise despite the absence of any lobbying. This ‘bias’ arises because the incumbent government maximizes its chances of re-election, byallocating resources across sectors so as to disproportionately influence voter perceptionin those sectors where the voters have the sharpest inference process. Thus, differences inaccess to information may lead the ‘effective’ median voter to be from the minoritariansector. 13Citizens who are better placed to acquire and process information have more governmental resources allocated towards them. In particular, in the model so far, such informational advantage occurs through two possible channels. The first is the variability of the region specific input hj.14One interpretation of this variability in hjis ‘technological’: for instance, rainfall (a crucial input into agricultural output) is variable in a way that electricity (an input into theindustrial sector) is not. If the variance of the rural sector input, i.e. r r2, is sufficiently higher than that of the urban sector input, i.e. ru2, then even with a majority of the 14For simplicity of exposition, we have only considered a single, exogenous input hjinto each sector. If there were multiple inputs into each sector, then the variance would be expected to be higher in the sector in whichthere are a larger number of inputs and greater diversity in the supply of these inputs.13The mechanism that here leads the ‘effective’ median voter to differ from the actual median voter, is quite distinct from other informational stories (e.g. Feddersen and Pesendorfer, 1996 ) where less-informed voters delegate the voting decision to more-informed voters. In our model, such a commitment by the rural voters wouldsee the government expend even more resources towards influencing the urban voters whose votes would then be even more crucial; in other words, the urban bias would only be exacerbated.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 147 population being rural, the government is likely to devote a disproportionate share of resources towards the urban sector. The lower variability in hutranslates into a sharper, more nuanced assessment of the government’s ability from observing an increase in theurban output than a corresponding change in the rural output. Given electoral imperatives,this translates into the government devoting more resources to raising urban output. 15 Another possible channel for the increased variability in the rural sector is due to thefact that rural residents tend to be more geographically dispersed. This could also lead to a greater variation in the received quality of the same public good. More importantly, even if there is no difference in the variability of the sector-specific inputs, i.e. r r2=ru2, an urban bias can still arise if there are a sufficiently high number of informed urban voters as compared to informed rural voters. Note that this refers toknowledge about the region-specific input, which allows residents to infer the govern-ment’s ability perfectly from the observed outcomes; a higher number of such informedvoters in the urban area viz. N upuas compared with Nrpr, will induce the government to put more resources to the urban public good than the rural one.16 The above proposition also looks at the effect of initial perception about the government on the direction of the bias. In the more plausible case where variability ofthe urban input is lower than that of the rural input, i.e. h u>hr, urban bias is more likely whenrs2is higher. For example, public perception about the ability of a government which has never been in power before is likely to be more variable. Such governments have a lotto gain by demonstrating better performance, and will therefore be more inclined to skewresources in favor of the more discerning urban voters. In contrast, for governments whohave been in power for long, public perception about ability is likely to be quite precise; such governments will find it more difficult to effect a change in the perception through changes in output. This reduces their incentive to bias resources towards the urban sector.Thus, the model suggests that the longer an incumbent stays in power, the degree of urbanbias in its resource allocation decision should diminish over time. In this section, we have looked at the consequences of differences in information availability about region-specific inputs and outcomes. In Section 3, we study the effectof differences in information availability with respect to global shocks, i.e. shocks thataffect all regions symmetrically. Before doing so, let us consider the efficiency of the political system here in re-electing talented governments and deposing those with low ability. 2.4.1. Efficacy of the political system In the past few decades, there has been a wave of democratization in much of the developing world. This has once again focused attention on one of the central functionsof democratic electoral politics, namely, to weed out incompetent governments. 15Our analysis has been restricted to two competing public goods—one rural and the other urban. The model can be generalized to a world with a multiplicity of public goods, where some rural goods may have a lower variability of the sector specific input (vis-a-vis urban goods) and vice versa. In such circumstances, we canexpect that there may be a rural bias for some goods and an urban bias in the case of others. This accords withsome of the evidence discussed in Moore (1993) . 16In Section 4.2, we discuss possible sources of such informational advantage of urban voters over rural residents.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 148 However, a casual observer of electoral politics in countries as diverse as Indonesia, India, Kenya and Nigeria would argue that in most of these countries ‘ability-based’politics frequently takes a backseat. Instead, what often drives outcomes in many ofthese cases, are other non-ability-based characteristics of politicians—be it ethnicity,ideology, religion or language. 17Comparing these features of the democratic process to the more ability-based competition observed in developed countries, a key issue that is oftenraised is whether better access to information would result in a more ‘efficient’ electoralsystem. In other words, would better access to information (be it through education, the media or otherwise) improve the chances of low ability incumbents being deposed and high ability ones retained? In this section, we take a first stab at this question. To keepthings interesting, we will assume that the fraction of informed voters is in a minority in thepopulation. In the relatively simple political structure here, people vote based on their perception of the government’s ability as well as on some non-related factors, which we call ‘charisma’.Here, charisma is a catch- allterm for all non-ability based characteristics that affect a voter’s decision. Given that the production process (Eq. (1)) for the provision of public goods in both sectors is increasing in the government’s ability s g, economic efficiency here requires that governments with above average talent be re-elected, while those with talentbelow the average ¯s gbe replaced. The actual electoral process here is stochastic and depends not only on sg, but also on the realization of the shocks huandhr. Thus, one way to analyze the efficacy of the political system would be to compute the probability of re-election for a government ofparticular ability level s g, and study the effect of various factors on this probability. As is shown in Appendix B, incorporating the updated beliefs (Eqs. (3), (5) and (4)) of the various groups of voters into Eq. (2), yields the equilibrium condition for re-election as: NupuþNrprþðNuð1/C0puÞþNrð1/C0prÞÞhuþhr hsþhuþhr/C26/C27 ðsg/C0¯sgÞ þNuð1/C0puÞþNrð1/C0prÞ hsþhuþhrðhuhuþhrhrÞ>0 ð6Þ Since huhu+hrhris normally distributed with mean 0 and variance hu+hr, the probability of re-election for a government of ability sgis then given by: 1/C0U/C0ðsg/C0¯sgÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃhuþhrp huþhrþNupuþNrpr 1/C0Nupu/C0NrprðhsþhuþhrÞ/C26/C27 /C20/C21 ð7Þ where Uis the cdf of the standard normal distribution. As expected, this probability is increasing in sg, and exceeds (is less than) 0.5 when sgis greater than (less than) the mean ¯sg. Differentiating the above expression identifies the effects of the various parameters on this probability function. These are summarized in the following proposition. 17Bardhan (1998) points to the ironic fact that electoral candidates in India are able to satisfy their constituencies through symbolic gestures such as erecting statues, rather than providing sorely needed publicgoods like drinking water.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 149 Proposition 2. For a government of talent sgexceeding (is less than) the mean ¯sg, the probability of being reelected increases (decreases) with (i) a rise in the proportion ofperfectly informed people N upu+N rpr, and (ii) a decrease in the variability in the public perception about the government’s ability, i.e. a lowering of rs2. The effect of a decrease in the variability of the rural or the urban input on this probability is U-shaped. Specifically, for sgexceeding the mean ¯sg, the probability of getting reelected (i) decreases with a decrease in rr2orru2if hu+h r<( N upu+N rpr)hs, and (ii) increases with a decrease in rr2orru2if h u+h r>(N upu+N rpr)hs. Proof. See Appendix B. 5 With an increase in the proportion of informed people in the population, whether in the rural or the urban sector, the political structure becomes more ‘ability-based’ in the sensethat the probability of reelecting talented governments and weeding out untalented onesincreases. In equilibrium, the informed voters observe perfectly the talent of the incumbentgovernment; therefore any increase in the number of such voters raises the efficacy of the political system. Similar is the effect of a decrease in the ex ante variability in public perception about talent. As can be seen from the above inequality (6), inefficiency in the political process hereoccurs due to the fact that extreme negative values of h uhu+hrhrcan cause uninformed voters to vote against an incumbent with above average talent (i.e., sg>¯sg). However, as hsincreases, uninformed voters’ decisions become less sensitive to changes in huorhr,s o that it takes relatively more extreme (negative) values of huhu+hrhrto inefficiently overthrow a competent incumbent. Therefore, as rs2decreases, the region of inefficiency shrinks and hence the probability of a competent government being re-elected increases. The effect of a change in ru2orrr2on this probability is however quite non-monotonic. When hu+hr<(Nupu+Nrpr)hs, an increase in the precision huorhrhas an adverse effect on the probability of reelecting talented governments and overthrowing untalented ones.For relatively higher levels of precision (i.e. for h u+hr<(Nupu+Nrpr)hs) however, the effect is reversed and an increase in this precision increases the efficacy of the politicalsystem. Intuition for this result can be understood from the fact that, at intermediate levels of h u andhr, an increase in either of the precisions has two effects. To see this, first consider an uninformed voter. When completely uninformed, her voting decision is a function of onlyher prior and ‘non-ability’ based (charisma) factors. As the precision of her observations y u and/or yrincreases, she shifts more weight on to (perceived) ability differences between the incumbent and the challenger, as gleaned from observed realizations of output.Consider a large negative realization of y j, caused by a large negative realization of hj. On observing such a yj, the uninformed voter is now less likely to re-elect the government, even though it may be of above-average talent. This is because, with a lower variance of hj, she would now attribute the low yjmore to poor government ability than to an adverse regional input shock. Thus, conditional on any given negative realization of yj, the probability of reelection decreases as hjincreases, even for a government with above average talent. This first effect serves to reduce efficiency of the political system.Secondly, however, as h jincreases, such extreme (negative) values of hj(and consequently yj) become less likely; (in expected terms) the outputs yuandyrbecome more reflective ofS. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 150 the government’s talent sg. Thus, while the region of inefficiency expands, the probability of being in that region decreases. The combination of these two effects leads to the non-monotonic impact of a change in h uorhron the efficacy of elections. To summarize, our analysis above offers several insights into the impact of greater information on the electoral process. The impact depends upon the nature of the increasein information. An increase in the fraction of well-informed voters does shift the focus ofelections more towards ability of the candidates, and away from observable, but non-ability based characteristics (such as ethnicity, social identity, etc.). However, partial improvements in information availability of imperfectly informed voters could initially make matters worse, since it can lower the likelihood of reelecting competent governmentsor deposing incompetent ones. 3. Resource allocation under common global shocks Economies are buffeted by shocks and uncertainties of many kinds. In the previous section, we demonstrated how an urban bias in resource allocation could arise due to differences in access to information availability about region-specific inputs. However,this is surely only part of the picture. Economies can also be hit by economy-wide shockswhich affect all regions. For instance, countries suffer from adverse balance of paymentscrises and economy-wide recessions. A collapse in access to the international capitalmarket after the East Asian crisis made it harder for governments to raise and allocatefunds to allsectors in these economies. An issue of interest is whether the sectoral distortions that we identified in the previous section get exacerbated or mitigated in the presence of such economy-wide common shocks. In this section, we adapt the benchmark model of the previous section to analyze the issue of how changes in economic conditionscan affect the degree of bias in sectoral resource allocation. Indeed as we will subsequentlydiscuss, such an examination may throw light on Fay and Opal’s (2000) puzzling evidence that a majority of the developing countries that experienced negative shocks to growthduring the last two decades, also experienced positive urbanization. We retain the basic structure of the model in the previous section. However, in order to keep the analysis simple while also incorporating the possibility of global economy-wide shocks, we make the following changes. In particular, we drop regional inputs from the production process 18and instead assume that productivity depends on a factor Awhich affects output in both sectors. This exogenous shock can be either high AH(if the state is high H), or low AL(if the state is low L), with AH>AL>0. Thus, both the rural and urban sectors have the same technology of production: yj¼As½sgþfðejÞ/C138 jafRural ;Urban g where sa{H,L}, and as before, sgis normally distributed with mean ¯sgand variance rg2. Thus, sectoral production is a function of the (common) state of the world, with the high 18The absence of the sectoral input is for simplicity. Alternately, we could assume that pu=pr= 1, so that all residents can see perfectly the regional input in their respective regions.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 151 state H occurring with probability pH, and the low state L with probability pL, where pH+pL=1 . Given the greater prevalence of television, radio and newspapers in cities and higher levels of education, urban residents are more likely to be aware of, say, fluctuations in theworld market, the country’s credit rating, as well as any other exogenous economy-wideshocks; thus, it seems reasonable to assume that urban residents are better informed thanrural residents about the incidence of these global shocks. We capture this by assuming that while urban voters can observe perfectly the state of the world, the rural voters do not observe it at all. As regards output, here we assume that all urban voters can see perfectlythe urban output and all rural voters can see perfectly the rural output, but none can see theoutput in the other’s sector. The above assumptions have been deliberately made with theaim of emphasizing that we have made the two sectors completely symmetric in everyrespect, except for the fact that while urban voters can observe the state of the world, therural voters cannot. Therefore, any distortions in governmental resource allocation that arisewill be only due to differences in information availability. The timing of the game is as before: at the first stage, the government (and the urban resident) sees the state of the world and decides on the allocation of funds between theurban and rural sectors; the output of the two sectors is then realized (and observed by therespective constituencies), and finally elections occur. 3.1. Equilibrium As in the previous section, voters have expectations about the government’s expendi- ture in the two sectors. Let us denote by e j*(s) the expectation about the government’s expenditure in sector jin state s. (As before, in equilibrium, these expectations are actually realized.) Note that in the absence of region-specific shocks, all urban voters here areinformed (in the sense of the previous section). Therefore, for an urban resident whoobserves the state of the world to be s, her belief about the government’s ability, on seeing an urban output of y uis yu As/C0fðeu*ðsÞÞ ð 8Þ The rural voter however, does not see the state of the world. Therefore, on observing a rural output of yr, she is not sure if this has occurred due to the production function yr=AH[sg+f(er*(H))] or due to yr=AL[sg+f(er*(L))]. Thus, the mean of her updated belief about the government’s ability is weighted by the relative probabilities of the two statesand is given by: p Hyr AH/C0fðer*ðHÞÞ/C20/C21 þpLyr AL/C0fðer*ðLÞÞ/C20/C21 ð9Þ Comparing expressions (8) and (9), we see that whereas the increase in perception from a marginal increase in urban output yuin state sis 1/As, that from a marginal increase in rural output yrispH AHþpL AL. Comparing the two marginal benefits gives the direction and magnitude of bias in resource allocation between the rural and urban sectors. This issummarized in the proposition below.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 152 Proposition 3. The government’s optimal resource allocation between the two sectors is characterized by the following: NufVðeu*ðLÞÞ NrfVðer*ðLÞÞ¼pLþpHAL AH<1<pLAH ALþpH¼NufVðeu*ðHÞÞ NrfVðer*ðHÞÞð10Þ For the case N u=N r, this implies that e u*>e r* when the state is L, and e u*<e r* when the state is H. Proof. See Appendix B. 5 The above result is quite striking. In particular, any urban bias in resources will be exacerbated in the bad state and will be lessened in the good state. Further, for someparameters (for example, when N randNuare sufficiently ‘close’, as in the limiting case of Nr=Nu) there will be a rural-bias in resource allocation in the good state and an urban-bias in the bad state. The intuition for this result is relatively simple: in good times, the sameresource allocation is more likely to produce a higher output in either sector. However, a better performance by the government is appropriately discounted for by the urban voters. This is because in good times, urban voters know that their high incomes are because ofthe state being H, and not entirely due to government performance and ability. On theother hand, the rural voters (who are uninformed about the state) are not sure if the betterperformance is due to a high productivity shock or in spite of a low one. Thus, they do notdiscount a better performance as much as the urban residents. Realizing that the rural voteris more likely to attribute their high income to governmental ability rather than to afavorable state, the government prefers to devote more resources towards the rural sector in the good state, so as to enhance its chance of staying in power. In the bad state, the opposite logic works, and therefore the resource allocation decision gets biased in favor ofthe urban sector. Using Eq. (10), we can also examine the magnitude of this bias in the two states. For example, if A Hincreases relative to AL, i.e. if AH/ALrises, then the difference between er*(H) and eu*(H) increases, while that between eu*(L) and er*(L) decreases. Again, it is the asymmetry of information between urban and rural voters that is at work. A higher AH raises the marginal product of resources in both sectors, but from the government’s point of view, this is more valuable in influencing the perception of the rural voters rather than that of the urban voters, who discount any increase in output appropriately. As we shall see in the next section, given that citizens care about the quality/quantity of public goods, such bias in public good provision has important implications for patterns ofmigration. 4. Extensions and discussion Our analysis has focused on examining the implications of differences in information availability across a heterogeneous population on sectoral resource allocation. Two distinctquestions immediately come to mind: first, why may such differences in information exist?and second, do our results of bias in resource allocation have any implications for theS. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 153 theory and pattern of migration in developing countries? In this section, we discuss both of these issues, starting with the latter. 4.1. Migration and urbanization The quality of public services such as education, health, water supply or crime prevention are important factors on which decisions about residence are made. The politically motivated wedge in rural versus urban public good provision that we described above thus has important consequences for the degree of urbanization. In this section, webriefly explore this link between such a bias in public good provision, migration patternsand the degree of urbanization. While the discussion that follows is only suggestive, it nevertheless has potentially important implications. First, through its focus on the government’s incentives for publicgood provision, it emphasizes an important, but relatively unexplored link between publicgood provision and migration patterns. Second and more directly, it adds a much neglected political dimension to the (large) literature on the design of government policies so as to ensure socially optimal migration levels from rural to urban areas. 19Our simple analysis suggests that policy design exercises that ignore such political considerations may wellturn out to be quite imperfect. We begin by considering a simple version of the classic Harris–Todaro model on migration. In this model, migration takes place in response to the differential between therural wage w r, and employment opportunities in the urban sector, which are generally characterized by a (high) inelastic wage w¯and a probability of obtaining employment, pu. Risk neutral individuals compare wrwith puw¯in making their decision on whether or not to migrate. Typically, wages in the rural sector are assumed to be completely flexible andgiven by the marginal product of labor, i.e. w r=grV(Nr), where gr(/C1) is the rural production function. If nuis the number of jobs in the urban sector, then competition for such jobs means that pu¼nu N/C0Nr. In equilibrium, the distribution of workers across the two sectors is such that grVðNrÞ¼wr¼¯wnu N/C0Nr. Thus, rural–urban migration takes place either due to an increase in the differential between the urban and rural wage w¯/C0wr, or due to improved job opportunities in the cities, i.e. an increase in nu. This is the classic result of Harris and Todaro (1970) . Now, suppose that workers care about not just wages, but also the availability of public goods in their area of residence. In other words, the utility of an individual in region j equals xj+yj, where xjis his (expected) employment income and yjis the level of public services in the area. Taking this into account, the modified migration equilibrium conditionis now given by, g rVðNrÞþyr¼¯wnu N/C0Nrþyu ð11Þ Observe that a priori, if we ignore any political imperatives of governments in providing public goods, the mere inclusion of public goods in the model would not affect 19For instance, see Basu (1980) on subsidies to rural and urban workers, as well as Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1974) .S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 154 migration decisions, since the government’s optimal allocation of resources would imply yu=yr. Let us examine Eq. (11) in light of Proposition 1. We argued that under plausible conditions, a government concerned with staying in power will allocate resources suchthat there is an ‘urban bias’, i.e. e u*>er*. Thus, in expected terms, the gap between urban and rural public goods, i.e. yu/C0yr, will be positive. This bias has a direct impact on the rural worker’s migration decision. More of them choose to migrate, i.e.(N/C0N r) goes up, despite a constant urban wage and a non-decreasing rural wage. Individuals’ decision to migrate to cities is driven by the greater public good provision gap between urban and rural areas, created by the government’s politicalimperatives. This gap may be in the form of rural–urban differences in educationfacilities, law and order, access to health, and so on. 20Note that this simple formulation provides an explanation for the puzzle of ‘urbanization without growth’,i.e. migration occurs in spite of no increase in urban–rural wage differences (see forexample, Fay and Opal (2000) ). According to the World Development Report (2000) , ‘‘Africa’s pattern of ‘urbanization without growth’ is in part the result of distorted incentives that encouraged migrants to move to cities to exploit subsidies rather than in response to opportunities for more productive employment’’. Our analysis throwslight on why governments facing greater political threat to remaining in office maywell prefer to allocate greater resources towards the more visible urban sector. This‘urban bias’ in resource allocation results in a greater incentive for migration and ahigher level of urbanization than we might expect by just examining rural–urbanwage differences. Evidence from migration surveys provides support for the idea that better provision of public services in urban areas such as education, sanitation, health is an important determinant of the rural migrants’ decision to move to urban areas (see summary inWilliamson, 1988; Andersen, 2002 ). Another related implication follows from Proposition 3, which argues that the extent of urban bias in a country will be more acute in bad times. In this case, Eq.(11) implies that the extent of migration towards cities would increase when theeconomy is faced with a negative shock, such as a macroeconomic collapse. This isalso consistent with evidence presented by Fay and Opal (2000 ,Table 1 )o n ‘urbanization without growth’ in Africa. They find that the rate of growth of urbanization was slightly higher in countries that experienced negative average growthrates. 4.2. Information availability and public good provision We have systematically explored the consequences of informational asymmetries between the rural and urban areas in skewing the pattern of public resource allocation. 20To take a particular example, Andersen (2002) reports that according to the MECVOI survey, access to better public goods, especially public education, was themost important reason for rural–urban migration in Bolivia.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 155 In this subsection, we briefly discuss the possible sources and extent of these asymmetries. 4.2.1. Wealth and education Urban residents with greater wealth cannot only afford better information, their higher education level imply a better capacity to assimilate it, as compared to their ruralcounterparts. For instance, the World Development Report (2002) 21notes that in Nepal, ‘‘...access to the press has been constrained by poverty, low literacy, and inadequate transport. Daily circulation of newspapers averages only 11 copies per 1000 people andresidents of rural areas are particularly unlikely to receive information.’’ According to theIndian National Readership Survey (1999), 62% of Indians in urban areas read newspapers and magazines each week, while only 29% of rural residents do so. This pattern is likely tobe replicated across the developing world, with the much higher rate of rural illiteracy (seeTable 1 drawn from the Rural Poverty Report, 2001 ). 4.2.2. Biased media coverage This bias created by the greater demand of wealthier and more educated urban ‘clients’ for information is further magnified through biased media coverage. Revenue for news-papers and other commercial media comes from two sources: client subscriptions andadvertisement revenue. Given higher readership and wealth, advertisers (and hencenewspapers) find it optimal to target the urban readership (see Stromberg, 2001 for a discussion). 4.2.3. Population density Finally, one of the defining characteristics of an urban area is the relatively high population density. Cities such as Tokyo, Mexico City, Sao Paulo have between 16 and 28million individuals living in a concentrated area or space. High population density andurbanization generates positive information externalities. As argued most recently byGlaeser (2000) , informational externalities are a crucial reason for the development of cities in the first place. 22Such information externalities imply that an urban resident is likely to have a better assessment of the actual realization of any sector-specific input or common shocks. 4.3. Government responsiveness and the urban informational bias In the face of these informational disparities, it is hardly surprising that govern- ments would find it politically advantageous to skew public resources in favor of thewell-informed urban voter. Anecdotal evidence of this phenomenon can be found in 21Page 192, Box 10.7. 22Glaeser (2000) finds that one of the most important reasons as to why financial firms locate in Manhattan is that ‘‘financial firms maintain their access to the continued swirl of information that surrounds the stock market.’’ Similarly, one of the big advantages of locating in Silicon Valley was informational; according toSaxenian (1994) , ‘‘informal conversations were pervasive and served as an important source of up-to-date information.’’S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 156 several contexts.23However, recent work done by Stromberg (2001) provides more systematic and direct evidence, albeit in the context of the United States over theperiod 1920–1940. Based on an exogenous expansion in access to radios during theNew Deal in the United States, he shows that U.S. counties with more radio listenersreceived more unemployment relief funds. In a developing country context, Besley and Burgess (2002) provide cross-sectional evidence at the state level in India that states with higher newspaper circulation had governments that were more responsive intackling floods and droughts. 4.3.1. Government response to global shocks: immunization coverage in the Philippines While the above cited papers provide evidence for the basic proposition of urban bias in our paper, a novel prediction of our model is the effect of positive or negative globalshocks on government responsiveness (Proposition 3). It says that, in case of a negativeshock, the government would be more reluctant to switch resources away from therelatively well-informed urban voter than from the poorly-informed rural voter and urbanbias is likely to be exacerbated. In this subsection, we provide some supportive evidence for this relation between information availability and changes in public good outcomes by examining the impact of a specific exogenous, global shock, on immunization coverageacross provinces in the Philippines. One of the reasons for studying the Philippines is that it was hit by the Asian Financial crisis in 1997. An immediate consequence of this crisis was that the Philippine CentralGovernment effected a 25% across the board cut on total maintenance and operatingexpenditure appropriations of all national government agencies in February 1998,including the Department of Health. Thus, for our purposes, the Asian crisis could be regarded as an exogenous global shock, inasmuch as the budget cuts that followed had the potential to affect all provinces symmetrically. However, as emphasized by Reyes et al. (1999) , since the government had ‘the discretion to decide which programs/activities will be given funding priority so that the impact of fiscal austerity measures on actualexpenditure obligations on various programs is largely uneven’. Data on immunizationcoverage both before and in the immediate aftermath of the post-crisis budgetary 23Unusually high prices of onions in the city of Delhi got a lot of play in the media (for one account of the story, see a leading Indian newsmagazine Frontline (07/20/98)) in the run-up to the elections in 1998 and is commonly held responsible for the dismal performance of the incumbent party in the elections. So much so, that in a (futile) bid to prevent it from becoming an election issue, (and while many in the Indian countryside regularly find it difficult to satisfy even their basic daily food requirement) the government imported several thousandtonnes of onions even though it had a detrimental impact on the rural agricultural sector. As the president of afarmers’ party, Shetkari Sanghatan observed in response, ‘‘ ...Onion prices is a sensitive point for the urban middle classes. The onion has brought tears to the eyes of many politicians. ( The Hindu , 04/10/2002).’’ Indeed, the political sensitivity of a rise in food prices in urban areas is well known. It has resulted in the Indian government setting up an overwhelmingly disproportionate number of Public Distribution Scheme (PDS) outlets that provide subsidised food in urban areas, while almost completely ignoring the rural areas, where the bulk of India’s famine and malnutrition cases occur (Mooij, 2002) . In large part, this urban bias in the distribution of PDS outlets (which serve mainly the urban poor and lower middle class) is perhaps more due to governmentalfear of adverse publicity in the case of a spike in urban food prices, rather than the lobbying efforts of a clique of rich/influential urban residents, who to begin with are unlikely to be directly dependent on food from ration shops.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 157 cutbacks (1996, 1997 and 1998) are available from Reyes et al. (1999) , who have compiled it from the Field Health Services Information System database of theDepartment of Health. Immunization coverage was chosen as our proxy for governmentexpenditures for two reasons. First, immunization coverage is almost completelyprovided out of the government health budget. Second, government expenditures onimmunization are less likely to be subject to lobbying by a coterie of urban-based elites,as may be argued in the case of transfers or aid programs directed toward a particular (small) group of citizens. 24Another important reason for our focus on the Philippines is the availability of a unique data set on information availability at the province level fromthe Philippines’ Functional Literacy, Education and Mass Media Survey, 1994. This wasa nation-wide survey that examined a variety of information access indicators, such asownership of radio, television and newspaper readership, as well as literacy at theprovince level. Reyes et al. (1999) note that budgetary cutbacks in the immediate aftermath of the Asian Financial crisis led to a dramatic reduction in immunization coverage in the Philippines. We are interested in whether these cutbacks in immunization coverage (at the province level) were related in any way to the degree of access to informationavailability. There is considerable variation in factors that affect information access acrossprovinces—education and literacy levels, media exposure, and population density. Weaggregate the province level data on the percentage of the population that is literate (10years of age and older), reads newspapers and owns televisions and owns radios toconstruct a simple index of information availability at the province level: INFO = liter-acy + newspaper readership+(radio + television) ownership where the variable takes on a minimum possible value of 0 and a maximum of 400. There are a total of 70 provinces and Table 2 presents a comparison of mean values of different variables for the top 25% and bottom 25% of provinces, ranked by this information access index. 25 As seen in Table 2 , the level of immunization in each year is systematically higher in the best informed provinces, relative to the least informed provinces. This is consistentwith the basic idea expressed in Proposition 1. Secondly, while all provinces suffered adrop in immunization coverage following the crisis, the adverse impact of the negativeshock was much larger in the least informed provinces. Following the budget cut in 1998, the top quartile of best informed provinces saw a drop of 18.6% in the fraction of the eligible population immunized, relative to 1997. In contrast, the bottom quartile ofprovinces saw a much sharper drop in of 34.1% in immunization coverage. This pictureof immunization coverage is fairly robust. It holds up for a variety of information accessvariables as well as different comparison groups. These include/exclude populationdensity, personal computer ownership and each of the individual information accessvariables such as radio, television and literacy. 24We would have ideally liked to look at the impact on public good expenditures across different provinces within each region, rather than outcomes, but such data were unavailable. However, the overlap between the expenditure and outcome variables is likely to be rather strong in this case, since the drop in immunizationcoverage was directly linked to an exogenously induced budget cut. 25There is little change in the rankings of the provinces even if we use other combinations of the above variables to construct an index of information availability.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 158 Thus, our simple analysis of immunization data from the Philippines delineates a pattern consistent with the predictions of our theory, both Propositions 1 and 3. Provinceswhere citizens were relatively poorly informed had lower immunization coverage andsuffered a much larger setback in coverage in response to the budget cuts, than provincesthat were relatively better informed. While reassuring, our results should be interpretedonly as suggestive. For our study to be more convincing, we would like to have moredirect data on government public expenditures. 5. Conclusion This paper emphasizes a distinct mechanism that underlies urban bias in government resource allocation—namely, differences in information across urban and rural resi-dents. In analyzing this informational channel, the paper also contributes more broadlyto the literature analyzing the impact of information on the efficacy of the political system. We show that greater information availability may result in the government allocating disproportionately more resources towards the urban citizen at the expenseof the relatively poorly informed rural resident. Furthermore, the extent of this bias isaffected by the overall condition of the economy. In the presence of good shocks, theurban bias is mitigated and may even be reversed, while under adverse economicshocks, the urban bias in resource allocation is exacerbated. Our analysis also has somecontributions to the literature on rural–urban migration. It shows that, unlike in the traditional Harris–Todaro explanation, such migration can occur even in the absence of a significant gap between rural and urban wages. In this context, our mechanism thusthrows light on the phenomenon of ‘urbanization without growth’ that has been foundTable 2 Impact of the Asian crisis on immunization coverage in the Philippines Variables Best-informed provinces(top 25%)Least-informed provinces(bottom 25%)High-density (urban) provinces(top 25%)Low-density (rural) provinces(bottom 25%) Population density (per km 2) 7278.67 161.39 8871.78 104.39 Information indexa314.48 184.95 304.07 204.51 Literacy % 97.47 89.09 97.55 91.11Radio ownership % 89.63 72.06 87.11 73.39TV ownership % 78.98 13.04 75.11 21.72 Newspaper readership 48.41 10.76 44.29 18.28 Fraction of eligible population immunized 1997 92.19 82.54 89.67 86.3 1998 70.08 53.88 74.84 62.71 % Change in fraction of eligible population immunized, 1997–1998/C018.56 /C034.08 /C012.26 /C027.51 Number of observations 18 18 18 18 aThe information index for each province is defined as: Literacy Rate + Newspaper readership + Radio ownership + TV ownership in the province.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 159 to be widely prevalent in many developing countries, particularly Africa in the past few decades. Finally, in emphasizing the differences in information access across urban andrural residents, the paper also contributes to our understanding of the effect ofinformation on the role of the electoral system in weeding out incompetent governmentsand retaining competent ones. In particular, we find that greater information availabilityneed not always improve the ability of elections to help control this adverse selectionproblem. Acknowledgements This paper has benefited from comments by V. Bhaskar, Karla Hoff, Debraj Ray, two anonymous referees and seminar participants at Ohio State University, Williams College,the 2001 NEUDC conference at Boston University, the 2002 CEA meetings at Calgaryand the 2003 APET conference at Duke University. Appendix A. Updating with only region-specific shocks Consider the case where (see DeGroot, 1970 ), y¼sþfðeÞþh where sfN(¯s,r s2), and hfN(0,rh2). Now, consider the updating of talent s, given an observation of yand expecting that the government is spending e*: pðsAyÞ¼pðsÞpðyAsÞ pðyÞ¼1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ 2pp1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r2 sp e/C01 2r2sðs/C0¯sÞ21ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ 2pp1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r2 hq e/C01 2r2 hðy/C0s/C0fðe*ÞÞ2 1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ 2pp1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r2 sþr2 hq e/C01 2ðr2sþr2 hÞðy/C0fðe*Þ/C0¯sÞ2 ¼1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ 2pp1ﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ v2pexp /C01 2v2s2/C02shs¯sþhhðy/C0fðe*ÞÞ hsþhh/C26/C27 /C18 /C20 þhs¯sþhhðy/C0fðe*ÞÞ hsþhh/C26/C272!# ð12Þ where v2¼r2 sr2 h r2sþr2 h¼1=1 r2sþ1 r2 h/C16/C17 : Thus, sjyis normally distributed with meanhs¯sþhhðy/C0fðe*ÞÞ hsþhhand variance v2.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 160 Appendix B. Proofs of Propositions Proof of Proposition 1. Incorporating the updated beliefs (Eqs. (3), (5) and (4)) of the various groups of voters into Eq. (2) yields the condition for winning as: Nupufsg/C0¯sgþfðeuÞ/C0fðeu*Þg þ Nrprfsg/C0¯sgþfðerÞ/C0fðer*Þg þ½Nuð1/C0puÞþNrð1/C0prÞ/C138 /C2huðsg/C0¯sgþhuþfðeuÞ/C0fðeu*ÞÞ þ hrðsg/C0¯sgþhrþfðerÞ/C0fðer*ÞÞ hsþhuþhr/C26/C27 >0 This expression can be re-written as: aYþbXþS½fðeuÞ/C0fðeu*Þ/C138 þ T½fðerÞ/C0fðer*Þ/C138>0 ð13Þ where Y=sg/C0¯sgis a normal random variable with mean 0 and variance 1/ hs,X=huhu+ hrhris a normal random variable with mean 0 and variance hu+hr, and the parameters a, b,SandTare given by: a¼NupuþNrprþ½Nuð1/C0puÞþNrð1/C0prÞ/C138huþhr hsþhuþhr b¼Nuð1/C0puÞþNrð1/C0prÞ hsþhuþhr S¼NupuþNuð1/C0puÞþNrð1/C0prÞ hsþhuþhrhu T¼NrprþNuð1/C0puÞþNrð1/C0prÞ hsþhuþhrhr Note that since the updated estimate of the talent is a normal variable, while the charisma factor is uniformly distributed with c0and/C0c0as the upper and lower bounds, it is possible that for extreme outcomes of sg/C0¯sg,huorhr, either all or none of the voters in a particular group will vote for the incumbent. Of course, if c0is large enough, then the probability of that occurring is very small, but it needs to be incorporated in the condition for calculating the overall probability of re-election. We will later show that incorporating it still maintains Eq.(13) as the equilibrium winning condition. Therefore, for the time being, let us take Eq. (13)as the condition for re-election, and examine the government’s resource allocation problem.s g/C0¯sg,huandhrare independent, normally distributed with mean 0. Thus, given euander, the ex ante distribution of the random variable on the left-hand side of Eq. (13), is normalwith mean lðe u;erÞ¼S½fðeuÞ/C0fðeu*Þ/C138 þ T½fðerÞ/C0fðer*Þ/C138 and a variance Vwhich is unaffected by euander. The government wishes to choose the allocation of resources between the urban and rural sectors so as to maximize its chances of being reelected. Thus in deciding to allocateS. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 161 its budget B¯between the two sectors, the government compares the marginal product (from its viewpoint of maximizing the probability of getting reelected) SfV(e) from an extra dollar in the urban sector with the marginal product TfV(e) in the rural sector. Thus, we have that eu*>er*i fS>T, i.e. if Nupu/C0Nrprþhu/C0hr hsþhuþhr½Nuð1/C0puÞþNrð1/C0prÞ/C138>0 which is the condition in Proposition 1. Condition (13) holds when the difference between the estimate of the incumbent’s ability and¯sg, for each group of voters, lies between /C0c0andc0. Thus, for each realization of Y=sg/C0¯sg, there is a corresponding cutoff value such that for shocks X=huhu+hrhrlarger than this cutoff, the incumbent wins. Note that since the updated estimate of the talent is a normal variable, while the charisma factor is uniformly distributed with c0and/C0c0as the upper and lower bounds, respectively, it is possible that for extreme outcomes of sg/C0¯sg,hu orhr, either all or none of the voters in a particular group will vote for the incumbent. Consider for example, the case where Y=sg/C0¯sgis large, so that all of the informed rural and urban voters vote for the incumbent no matter what the realization of the shocks hu,hror of the charisma factor c. However, some of the uninformed voters may still vote for the challenger for very adverse realizations of huandhr. Again, there is a cutoff value ofX=huhu+hrhrwhich defines the boundary between winning and losing. In this case however, a slight drop in talent sgdoes not cause as much of a drop in the number of votes (since among the informed voters, it has no effect) and therefore does not require asmuch of a compensation in terms of Xto win the election. Hence, the winning condition is flatter in those regions. The precise equations to determine the cutoff conditions can bederived in a manner similar to Eq. (13), and are available from the authors on request.They are depicted by the dark line in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1. Election winning region.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 162 The shaded area in the figure denotes the region in which the incumbent wins the election. Note that in equilibrium, f(eu)/C0f(eu*) =f(er)/C0f(er*) = 0, and so the deviations from Eq. (13) above the line Y=c0and that below the line Y=/C0c0exactly cancel each other out. Thus, Eq. (13) gives the equilibrium condition for winning over the entirerange of XandY. Changing e uanderalso has marginal effects on the regions where the condition for re- election departs from Eq. (13). Since the density of a normal variable goes to zero at the extremes, these marginal effects become vanishingly small when c0is very large. Therefore, ifc0is large enough, then in calculating the marginal benefits one needs to only take into account the marginal effect of euanderonl(eu,er). 5 Proof of Proposition 2. From Eq. (7), the probability of winning for a particular government of talent sgis given by: 1/C0U/C0ðsg/C0¯sgÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃhuþhrp huþhrþNupuþNrpr 1/C0Nupu/C0NrprðhsþhuþhrÞ/C26/C27 /C20/C21 Forsg>¯sg, this is clearly increasing in Nupu+Nrprand in hs. Differentiating this expression with respect to hu+hrgives: uð/C1Þðsg/C0¯sgÞ 1/C0Nupu/C0Nrpr1 2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃhuþhrp /C0NupuþNrpr 2ðhuþhrÞ3=2hs() which is greater or less than zero according as hu+hrb(Nupu+Nrpr)hs. Thus, for sg>¯sg, the probability of winning is increasing in hu+hronly if hu+hr>(Nupu+Nrpr)hs. 5 Proof of Proposition 3. For the urban sector, the gain in perception from a marginal increase in yuin state sis 1/As. In state s, given an allocation of resources eu(s) to the urban sector, the urban output yuis normally distributed with mean As[¯sg+f(eu(s))]. Therefore, in electoral terms, the marginal benefit from allocating an extra dollar to the urban sector instate sis 1 2c0NuAsfVðeuðsÞÞ=As. For the rural sector, the gain in perception from a marginal increase in yrispH AHþpL AL. Thus, in electoral calculations, the marginal benefit from increasing resources to the ruralsector is given by 1 2c0NrAsfVðerðsÞÞ½pH AHþpL AL/C138. Equating the two marginal benefits gives us, for the state L: NufVðeu*ðLÞÞ NrfVðer*ðLÞÞ¼pLþpHAL AH<1; and for state H: NufVðeu*ðHÞÞ NrfVðer*ðHÞÞ¼pLAH ALþpH>1; with the inequalities following from the fact that pL+pH= 1 and AH>AL. 5S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 163 Appendix C Table 1 Rural–urban differences Adequate sanitation Safe drinking water Health services Illiteracy rates Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban Rural Asia and the Pacific Cambodia – 9 20 12 80 50 37.7 69.6 China 74 7 – – 100 89 12 26.2India 70 14 – 82 100 80 26.7 55.3Indonesia 77 49 87 57 – – – – Malaysia 94 94 100 86 – – – – Nepal 28 14 61 59 – – 35.8 64.2Pakistan 93 39 85 56 99 35 43 –Philippines 89 63 91 81 77 74 2.7 10.3 Sri Lanka 68 62 88 65 – – 6.6 15.2 Thailand 97 94 94 88 90 90 3.3 7.5Viet Nam 43 15 – – 100 80 – – Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia 74 37 88 43 77 52 8.9 36.1Brazil 80 30 80 28 – – 10.7 31.1 Colombia 97 56 90 32 – – – – Costa Rica 95 70 100 99 100 63 4.9 17Dominican Rep. 76 83 88 55 84 67 – –Ecuador 95 49 81 10 70 20 – – Guatemala 95 74 97 48 47 25 16.8 47.8 Honduras – 57 91 66 80 56 – –Nicaragua 34 35 93 28 100 60 – –Panama – – 99 73 95 64 – – Paraguay 65 14 70 6 90 38 – – Peru 89 37 91 31 – – – –Venezuela 64 30 79 79 – – – – Africa Cameroon 64 36 – 30 44 39 – –Ghana 62 44 88 52 92 45 – – Lesotho 56 35 64 60 – – – – Madagascar 68 30 – – 65 65 – –Mauritania 44 19 87 41 72 33 – –Niger 79 5 70 44 99 30 – – Nigeria 50 32 80 39 85 62 – – Senegal 71 15 90 44 – – – –Sierra Leone 17 8 58 21 90 20 – – Uganda 75 55 60 36 99 42 – – Zambia 94 57 66 37 100 50 – – Source: Rural Poverty Report 2001. Figures across countries are not comparable since they are for the latest year available for each country.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 164 References Ades, A.F., Glaeser, E.L., 1995. Trade and circuses: explaining urban giants. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 195–227. Andersen, L., 2002. Rural–Urban Migration in Bolivia: Advantages and Disadvantages. Working Paper no. 5/ 2002, Institute for Socio-Economic Research, Catholic University of Bolivia, La Paz. Arnott, R.J., Gersovitz, M., 1986. Social welfare underpinnings of urban bias and unemployment. Economics Journal 96, 413–424. Bardhan, P., 1998. The political economy of Development in India. Oxford Univ. Press, New Delhi.Basu, K., 1980. Optimal policies in dual economies. Quarterly Journal of Economics 95, 187–196. Bates, R.H., 1981. Markets and States in Tropical Africa: The Political Basis of Agricultural Policies. University of California Press, Berkeley. Besley, T., Burgess, R., 2002. The political economy of government responsiveness: theory and evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1415–1452. Bhagwati, J., Srinivasan, T.N., 1974. On reanalyzing Harris –Todaro: policy rankings in the case of sector- specific sticky wages. American Economic Review 64, 502–508. Dewatripont, M., Jewitt, I., Tirole, J., 1999. The economics of career concerns. Part II: an application to missions and accountability of government agencies. Review of Economic Studies 66, 199–217. DeGroot, M., 1970. Optimal Statistical Decisions. McGraw-Hill, New York. Fay, M., Opal, C., 2000. Urbanization without Growth: A Not So Uncommon Phenomenon. World Bank Working Paper. No. 2412. Feddersen, T.J., Pesendorfer, W., 1996. The swing voter’s curse. American Economic Review 86, 408–424. Glaeser, E.L., 1999. Urban Primacy and Politics. Discussion Paper no. 1874, Harvard Institute of Economic Research. Glaeser, E.L., 2000. The future of urban research: nonmarket interactions. In: Gale, W.G., Rothenberg Pack, J. (Eds.), Brookings–Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs 2000. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC, pp. 101–150. Harris, J., Todaro, M., 1970. Migration, unemployment and development: a two-sector analysis. American Economic Review 60, 126–142. Holmstrom, B., 1982. Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective, in: Essays in Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck. Swedish School of Economics, Helsinki, pp. 209–230. Reprintedin Review of Economic Studies (1999) 66, 169–182. Howes, S., Jha, S., 1992. Urban bias in Indian public distribution system. Economic and Political Weekly 27, 1022–1030. International Fund for Agricultural Development, 2001. Rural Poverty Report.Lipton, M., 1977. Why Poor People Stay Poor: Urban Bias in World Development. Harvard Univ. Press, Cam- bridge, MA. Mooij, J. 2002. Welfare Policies and Politics: A Study of Three Government Interventions in Andhra Pradesh, India. Working Paper no. 181, Overseas Development Institute, London. Moore, M., 1993. Economic structure and the politics of sectoral bias: East Asian and other cases. Journal of Development Studies 29, 79–128. Persson, T., Tabellini, G., 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Reyes, C., Manasan, R., Orbeta, A., de Guzman, G. 1999. Social Impact of the Regional Financial Crisis in the Philippines. Discussion Paper no. 99-14, Philippine Institute of Development Studies, Philippines. Rogoff, K., 1990. Equilibrium political budget cycles. American Economic Review 80, 21–36.Saxenian, A., 1994. Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route, vol. 128. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA. Stromberg, D., 2001. Mass-media and public policy. European Economic Review 45, 652–663. Williamson, J.G., 1988. Migration and urbanization. In: Chenery, H., Srinivasan, T.N. (Eds.), Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 1. North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 425–465. World Bank, 2000. World Development Report: Attacking Poverty. Oxford Univ. Press, New York. World Bank, 2002. World Development Report: Building Institutions for Markets. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.S. Majumdar et al. / Journal of Development Economics 75 (2004) 137–165 165