 World Politics 54 ( July 2002), 462–93POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE Privatization Choices in Latin America By M. VICTORIA MURILLO* PRIVATIZATION worldwide reduced state-owned enterprises’ share of global GDPfrom over 10 percent in 1979 to less than 6 per- cent by the end of the century.1In Latin America privatizing govern- ments included not only right-wing regimes, such as Pinochet’s inChile, Chamorro’s in Nicaragua, and Calderon Sol’s in El Salvador, butalso populist parties, which had long promoted and implemented na-tionalization. Indeed, old populist parties, previously such championsof nationalization such as  MNR (National Revolutionary Movement) in Bolivia, the Peronists in Argentina, AD(Democratic Action) in Venezuela, and the PRI(Institutional Revolutionary Party) in Mexico, led the push to privatize in their respective countries. The regional wave of privatization seems to give credence to theo- ries of policy convergence over those of partisan policy-making. Thisarticle argues further, however, that not all governments implement pri-vatization in the same way, even in the context of policy convergence.Although technocrats propose similar policy options in countries where * I acknowledge the ﬁnancial support provided by the Junior Faculty Fellowship, the Yale Center for International and Area Studies, the Leitner Program in Political Economy, and the Social ScienceResearch Fund at Yale University. I thank the  CEPAL in Santiago, the CIDE in Mexico City, and Uni- versidad de San Andrés in Buenos Aires for institutional support. Previous versions of this article werepresented at the 2001 annual meeting of the American Political Science Association, the David Rock-efeller Center at Harvard University, the Kellogg Institute at the University of Notre Dame, the Insti-tute for Latin American Studies at Columbia University, the Program in Latin American Studies atJohns Hopkins University, and the faculty colloquium at Yale University. For their research assistance,I thank Constanza Di Nucci, Andira Hernández, Bárbara Murphy, Pablo Sandoval, and CatalinaRuiz. For their comments, I thank Arun Agrawal, Robert Bates, Carlos Boix, Ernesto Calvo, JavierCorrales, Keith Darden, Jorge Dominguez, Eduardo Engel, Stephan Haggard, Frances Hagopian,Pauline Jones-Luong, Alvin Klevorick, Margaret Levi, Ellen Lust-Okar, Susan Rose-Ackerman, Car-los Rufﬁn, and three anonymous reviewers. 1 See William Megginson and Jeffrey Netter, “From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical Stud- ies in Privatization,” Journal of Economic Literature 39 ( June 2001). According to Nancy Brune and Geoffrey Garrett, Latin America accounted for 56.4 percent of the privatization revenue in currentU.S. millions of dollars for the 1988–98 period; see Brune and Garrett, “The Diffusion of Privatizationin the Developing World” (Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Political ScienceAssociation, Boston, August 31–September 3, 2000).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 462 capital dearth creates pressures for policy convergence—which follows the guidelines of international ﬁnancial institutions and foreign in-vestors—politicians build the electoral and government coalitions thatmake these policies possible. Politicians’ preferences shape the speciﬁcinstitutions that will be used to implement those policies introducing a“political bias,” which is contingent on the privatizing government.Hence, this political bias explains that the regional convergence to privatization may be variously implemented according to different in-stitutional preferences. Thus, although politicians may be losing inﬂu-ence about whether to privatize, they still have a strong say in how toprivatize. This article analyzes the impact of this political bias by focusing on the choice of regulatory institutions and selling conditions in ﬁve LatinAmerican cases of privatization of electricity and telecommunications.Both ideas and constituencies inﬂuence the way in which policymakersdeﬁne their institutional preferences. Beliefs about economic national-ism and state intervention inﬂuence the selection of regulations at thetime of privatization, whereas coalition building with political con-stituencies shapes how selling conditions in privatized companies willbe deﬁned . The privatization of telecommunications and electricity provides an excellent setting in which to study this effect, as dependence on foreigninvestment for technological change is acute in both sectors. Moreover,some segments of these industries are natural monopolies with largesunk investments and visible rates, which generate a temptation forregulatory expropriation after privatization. 2This combination in- creases the pressure for policy convergence at the time of privatization,when investors—who are well informed about regulatory practices—have more inﬂuence on governments competing for their capital.Conversely, after the realization of sunk investment, pressure for con-vergence should decline. Furthermore, the cases of privatization studiedherein were chronologically proximate, such that policymakers had notime to learn about regulatory developments. However, the variation in 2“The combination of large investments in durable, speciﬁc assets and strong politicization means that utilities are particularly vulnerable to administrative expropriation of their vast quasi-rents”; BrianLevy and Pablo Spiller, “Introduction,” in Levy and Spiller, eds., Regulations, Institutions and Commit- ment: Comparative Study of Telecommunications (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 3. Tech- nological changes, however, have recently permitted competition in telecommunications. Competitionin electricity generation is therefore spreading, although investments are high, durable, and immov-able. “In the cases of transmissions and distribution, economies of scales and high sunk costs createconditions of natural monopoly, where a single network of facilities can provide transmission or distri-bution services more efﬁciently than duplicative systems”; Carlos Rufﬁn, “The Political Economy ofInstitutional Change in the Electricity Supply Industry” (Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 2000), 113.POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 463v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 463 terms of institutional choices ranged from restrictions on foreign capi- tal participation based on economic nationalism to the delegation ofregulatory power in autonomous bodies inﬂuenced by beliefs aboutstate intervention. They also included diverse selling conditions thatsubsidized core constituencies, which otherwise would have been un-able to acquire the same proportion of privatized assets. The sellingconditions determine the short-term beneﬁciaries of privatization,whereas the institutional choices shape the future functioning of theprivatized industries. The article has four sections. The ﬁrst discusses the implications of Latin American convergence toward privatization. The second sectionfocuses on the effect of the political bias of privatizing governments inshaping their institutional choices for implementing privatization ofpublic utilities. The third section presents ﬁve case studies from Ar-gentina, Chile, and Mexico to assess the implications derived from thepolitical bias hypothesis. The last section concludes and discusses ques-tions for future research. I. P OLICY CONVERGENCE TOWARD PRIV ATIZATION During the postwar era state-led industrialization in Latin America was at the core of economic policy-making and aimed to accelerateeconomic and social development. Hirschman explained that the roleof the state was heightened by the need to compensate for the late startin industrialization. 3Latin American development ideologies, both in their national-populist and in their developmentalist versions, empha-sized state intervention and public enterprises to promote economicgrowth. 4State-owned enterprises were considered an efﬁcient way to deal with externalities and were expected to serve the public interest, toreduce vulnerability to external shocks, and to promote economicdevelopment. 5 State-led development and state-owned enterprises also served to forge political coalitions. Latin American populist parties used nation-alization to build support coalitions of workers, consumers, and domes-464 WORLD POLITICS 3Albert Hirschman, “The Political Economy of Import-Substituting Industrialization in Latin America,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (February 1968). 4See Peter Evans, Dependent Development (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979); Stephan Haggard, Pathways from the Periphery (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1990); and Kathryn Sikkink, Ideas and Institutions (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1991). The national-populist and developmentalist policies differ in their support for light (horizontal) or heavy and basic (vertical)industrialization. 5Sebastian Edwards, Crisis and Reform in Latin America (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), 71.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 464 tic business sectors. Nationalization of public utilities usually implied taking over foreign-owned assets and, thus, hurting players that wereexternal to the domestic political system. The beneﬁciaries includeddomestic business sectors, which became suppliers or received subsi-dized rates to foster national production, workers who received highersalaries and beneﬁts, and residential consumers who obtained lowerprices and extended coverage of their public services. The costs of thesesubsidies were not felt immediately. Even when treasuries had to startcovering the deﬁcits of state-owned public utilities, tax evasion and in-direct taxation—mainly through inﬂation—spread costs despite theconcentration of beneﬁts. Hence, nationalization was a policy asset forcoalition building in Latin America. 6 The debt crisis triggered the spread of new economic ideas in gen- eral and of privatization in particular. By the early 1990s, the failure oftraditional policies in dealing with capital shortages—which were im-portant to cover ﬁscal deﬁcits, trade deﬁcits, and debt services—ex-posed the crisis of the previous developmental strategies and facilitatedthe emergence of a new policy consensus. 7The strain of the crisis pushed governments to take the risks implied in policy innovation andturned former advocates of nationalization into proponents of privati-zation. 8Under these conditions multilateral organizations, creditors, and businesses, with their technical expertise, became more inﬂuential.9POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 465 6Robert Bates provides a theory about the use of state subsidies and state-owned enterprises to build governing political coalitions and applies it to Africa; see Bates, Markets and States in Tropical Africa (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981). Barry Ames and Barbara Geddes use argu- ments of this type to explain the preference of Latin American politicians for allocating resourcesthrough political bargaining to provide rents to constituencies and build political coalitions. See Ames,Political Survival (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987); and Geddes, Politician’s Dilemma: Building State Capacity in Latin America (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994). 7Armando Castelar Pinheiro and Ben Ross Schneider, Leslie Armijo, and Sylvian Turcotte and Philippe Faucher emphasize the ﬁnancial urgency of governments in terms of ﬁscal revenue and creditavailability in explaining Latin American privatization. See Pinheiro and Schneider, “The Fiscal Im-pact of Privatization in Latin America,” Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 34 (Summer 1994); Armijo, “Balance Sheet or Ballot Box? Incentives to Privatize in Emerging Democracies,” in PhilipOxhorn and Pamela Starr, eds., Markets and Democracy in Latin America (Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rien- ner, 1999); and Turcotte and Faucher, “How Markets and Business Power Inﬂuenced Privatization inLatin America” (Manuscript, Department of Political Science, Université de Montreal, 1999). 8See Karen Remmer, “The Politics of Neoliberal Economic Reform in South America, 1980–94,” Studies in Comparative International Development 33 (Summer 1998); Kurt Weyland, “Risk Taking in Latin American Economic Restructuring: Lessons from Prospect Theory,” International Studies Quar- terly 40 ( June 1996); and Susan Stokes, Mandates and Democracy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). 9John Williamson coined the term “Washington Consensus” to highlight the inﬂuence of ideas and multilateral organizations in policy convergence; Williamson, The Political Economy of Policy Re- form (Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 1994). Barbara Stallings and John Ikenberry emphasize policy emulation and international inﬂuence through multilateral organizations;see Stallings, “International Inﬂuence on Economic Policy: Debt, Stabilization, and Structural Re-form,” in Stephan Haggard and Robert Kaufman, eds., The Politics of Economic Adjustment: Interna-v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 465 Fiscal crises further wore down opposition to privatization by reducing the appeal of bankrupt state-owned enterprises (whose subsidies weredisappearing) for suppliers, workers, and unsatisﬁed consumers. Thus, the success of privatization experiences in dealing with ﬁscal deﬁcits and the lack of capital inﬂows provoked its diffusion to othercountries as they replaced policies that had proved ineffectual. Tech-nocrats, domestic and international, became the agents of policy diffu-sion, whereas investors with scarce capital provided an incentive forprivatization in countries seeking foreign capital inﬂows. 10Latin America as a region had the two main conditions for policy diffusion:economic competition for scarce capital (which creates the pressure forconvergence) and cultural similarities (which facilitate the spread ofpolicy ideas). 11 The policy convergence toward privatization seems to defy partisan theories about political policy preferences mostly derived from the OECD countries.12Boix argues that left-wing parties prefer to raise pro- ductivity by increasing government intervention whereas conservativeparties encourage the private provision of capital. Indeed, he speciﬁcallymentions privatization as an example of the different policy preferencesof conservatives and socialist parties in the  OECD .13Garrett and Iversen and Wren show a partisan effect (combined with labor organization) on466 WORLD POLITICS tional Constraints, Distributive Conﬂicts, and the State (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992); and Ikenberry, “The International Spread of Privatization Policies: Inducement, Learning, and ‘PolicyBandwagoning,’” in Ezra N. Suleiman and John Waterbury, eds., The Political Economy of Public Sector Reform and Privatization (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1990). 10Ikenberry (fn. 9) coined the term “bandwagoning” to explain policy emulation with respect to privatization, and Luigi Manzetti explains privatization as “policy substitution” due to the failure ofthe previous strategy of public enterprises; Manzetti, Privatization South American Style (Oxford: Ox- ford University Press, 2000). Williamson (fn. 9) makes a case for the role of international ﬁnancial in-stitutions in spreading the ideas associated with privatization and other market reforms in what helabeled the “Washington Consensus.” Ben Ross Schneider argues that technocrats are appointed as asignal to investors and international ﬁnancial institutions, which demand the market-oriented policies;Schneider, “The Material Bases of Technocracy: Investor Conﬁdence and Neoliberalism in LatinAmerica,” in Miguel Centeno and Patricio Silva, eds., The Politics of Expertise in Latin America (Lon- don: St. Martin’s Press, 1998). 11Beth Simmons and Zachary Elkin show the effect of economic competition on capital and of religion in the diffusion of economic liberalization policies; Simmons and Elkin, “Competition, Com-munication or Culture? Explaining Three Decades of Foreign Economic Policy Diffusion” (Manu-script, Department of Political Science, University of California, Berkeley, 2001). Brune and Garrett(fn. 1) suggest that competitive emulation for foreign capital explains that geographic region is thestrongest predictor of privatization for a sample of 148 developing countries between 1988 and 1998. 12Referring to the adoption of Keynesian policies, Peter Hall summarizes an array of empirical studies arguing that “the orientation of the governing party appears to have been the single most im-portant factor affecting the likelihood that a nation would pursue Keynesian policies”; Hall, “Conclu-sions: The Politics of Keynesian Ideas,” in Hall, ed., The Political Power of Economic Ideas: Keynesianism across Nations (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989), 376. 13Carles Boix, Political Parties, Growth and Equality: Conservative and Social Democratic Economic Strategies in the World Economy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 85–90.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 466 government expenditures and social policies in the OECD .14In Latin America, Kaufman and Segura-Ubiergo also ﬁnd that governmentcoalitions have an effect on social policy-making. 15These political pol- icy preferences seem to have succumbed to the policy diffusion of pri-vatization in Latin America. This article argues that the politicalpreferences of incumbent governments may not explain the occurrenceof privatization but that they can explain the way in which privatiza-tion is implemented. T HEPOLITICS OF PRIV ATIZATION :IMPOSITION ,CAPTURE ,AND PARTISANSHIP Students of the political economy of market reforms limit the role of politics in privatization to the implementation of the new policy op-tions proposed by technocrats. They assume that the beneﬁciaries ofnationalization are different from those of privatization. 16Privatization is supposed to produce concentrated losses to suppliers, workers, oreven subsidized consumers. On the contrary, “compared to those whogain from the status quo, the diffuse beneﬁciaries of the reforms mayhave substantial difﬁculty organizing,” thus making privatization difﬁ-cult to implement. 17For this reason the literature on the politics of pri- vatization focuses on its occurrence “against all odds.” Executiveauthority to dismantle opposition from “vested interests” was consid-ered a precondition for the success of privatization and other market-oriented policies. 18Government authority and institutional capabilities were singled out as key factors in the implementation of privatization.19POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 467 14Geoffrey Garrett, Partisan Politics in the Global Economy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998); and Torben Iversen and Anne Wren, “Equality, Employment, and Budgetary Restraint:The Trilemma of the Service Economy,” World Politics 50 ( July 1998). 15Robert R. Kaufman and Alex Segura-Ubiergo, “Globalization, Domestic Politics, and Social Spending in Latin America: A Time-Series Cross-Section Analysis, 1973–97 ,”World Politics 53 ( July 2001). 16Ikenberry (fn. 9), 95; and Edwards (fn. 5), 174. 17Stephan Haggard and Robert Kaufman, “Economic Adjustment and the Prospect for Democ- racy,” in Haggard and Kaufman (fn. 9), 27. 18The degree of executive concentration of power required for reforms was never speciﬁed but it ranged from authoritarianism to “delegative democracy”—lacking checks and balances on the power ofthe executive according to Guillermo O’Donnell—to strong presidents with ample decree power;O’Donnell, “Delegative Democracy,” Journal of Democracy 5 ( January 1994). When Congress was in- cluded in the picture, partisan discipline in the legislature was deemed crucial. 19Manzetti (fn. 10) points to ﬁve key factors regarding government capabilities for privatization: a cohesive economic team, technical and administrative capabilities, bureaucratic cooperation, concen-trated executive authority, and speed (p. 13). Ana Margheritis makes a case for strong presidential lead-ership as a key variable in explaining the Argentine privatization process in general; see Margheritis,Ajuste y reforma en Argentina (1989–1995 ) (Buenos Aires: Nuevohacer, 1999). Walter Molano and Ben Alfa Petrazzini also emphasize this variable to explain the success of telecommunications’ privatiza-tion in their comparison of Argentina, Mexico, and Brazil; Molano, The Logic of Privatization: Thev54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 467 In particular, institutional executive authority exercised through decrees and a reduced number of veto points was considered important to in-sulating policymakers and allowing for privatization. Yet privatization, like any mechanism of property distribution, in- cludes concentrated rents and concentrated beneﬁciaries. 20Thus, Latin American policymakers could very well rely on concessions rather thanon imposition to implement privatization. In studying privatization inthe region, both Teichman and Schamis ﬁnd that the biggest winnersfrom privatization were the industrial-ﬁnancial conglomerates, whichwere supposed to be among the losers in the process. 21In some coun- tries of the region even supposed losers such as labor unions receivedconcessions in exchange for their support for market-oriented and pri-vatizing policies. 22 Political bargaining, however, is insufﬁcient to explain diversity in privatization. Politicians did more than distribute short-term conces-sions. They took advantage of the privatization process to distribute re-sources in a way that allowed them to constitute or reinforce politicalcoalitions. Moreover, when implementing privatization, their prior be-liefs inﬂuenced how they processed the information regarding the newstate of the world and shaped their institutional preferences. The com-bined effect of political coalitions and beliefs generated a systematic ef-fect in the process of implementation that I call “political bias.” II. P OLITICAL BIAS AND POLICY IMPLEMENTATION Technocrats are the agents of policy innovation. Politicians become re- ceptive to these ideas when previous policies do not provide results andas a result jeopardize their political survival. Politicians provide morethan leadership for policy networks; they also provide support coali-468 WORLD POLITICS Case of Telecommunications in the Southern Cone of Latin America (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood  Press, 1997); and Petrazzini, The Political Economy of Telecommunications Reform in Developing Coun- tries: Privatization and Liberalization in Comparative Perspective (Westport, Conn.: Praeger Publish- ers, 1995). 20The literature on privatization in the former socialist countries arrives at a similar conclusion re- garding the concentration of beneﬁts from privatization. See, in particular, Joel Hellman’s provocativeargument about how the sequencing of reforms generates arbitrage opportunities between the re-formed and unreformed sectors. These opportunities allow winners to take large rents, thus provokingtheir later opposition to the continuation of reforms that would reduce such rents; Hellman, “WinnersTake All: The Politics of Partial Reform in Postcommunist Transitions,” World Politics 50 ( January 1998). 21Judith Teichman, The Politics of Freeing Markets in Latin America (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001); and Hector Schamis, Re-Forming the State: The Politics of Privatization in Latin America and Europe (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2002). 22Maria Victoria Murillo, Labor Unions, Partisan Coalitions and Market Reforms in Latin America (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 468 tions for policy change, which are usually based on political parties.23 Politicians know that in order to keep their support coalition and signal their loyalty to it, they need to give resources to activists and con-stituencies. The process of coalition building is complex and encom-passes more issues than the privatization of public utilities. However,politicians’ inﬂuence in policy implementation is not limited to creatingthe “illiberal lacunae” that many authors argue were necessary for theimplementation of market reforms. 24Instead, some of the institutional choices they make will suggest different developmental paths, whosedistributive consequences are different in the short term—when politi-cians are in ofﬁce—than in the long term—when they may or may notbe in ofﬁce. Two major factors inﬂuence the institutional preferences of politi- cians in implementing the privatization of public utilities: beliefs andconstituencies. Beliefs generate priors that inﬂuence the way in whichpoliticians update their information to adopt the new ideas presentedby technocrats. Coalitional partners generate loyalties that shape insti-tutional preferences with certain distributive consequences. Hence, thepolitical bias of the privatizing government inﬂuences institutionalchoices, such as regulatory institutions and the selling conditions of pri-vatization, which in turn affect future resource distribution in priva-tized markets. (See Figure 1.) The previous policies of the incumbent party had generated their current political beliefs and coalition allies. Earlier, beliefs about devel-opment prompted governments to implement policies that allowedpoliticians to constitute or reinforce their political coalitions becausethese policies beneﬁted their constituencies. Conversely, these con-stituencies provided support for the political parties whose beliefs gen-erated these policies. This cycle reinforced political coalitions, whichtied the beliefs of politicians and activists to the policy beneﬁts receivedby constituencies and which inﬂuenced the subsequent choices ofpoliticians. 25Because, however, these factors are contingent on the po- litical bias of the privatizing government, they are not purely path de-pendent. Thus, the beliefs and constituencies of the privatizingPOLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 469 23On partisan coalitions and market reforms, see Edward L. Gibson, “The Populist Road to Mar- ket Reform: Policy and Electoral Coalitions in Argentina and Mexico,” World Politics 49 (April 1997). Teichman (fn. 21) discusses “policy networks” with regard to privatization in Latin America. 24Gibson (fn. 23) and Javier Corrales claim that party concessions and the resulting “illiberal lacu- nae” are necessary for the occurrence of market reforms; Corrales, “A Theory on the Politics of Eco-nomic Reform in Latin America,” Comparative Politics 32 ( January 2000). 25See Hall (fn. 12); and on the relationship between parties, interests, and ideas, see Peter Goure- vitch, “Keynesian Politics: The Political Sources of Economic Policy Choices,” in Hall (fn. 12).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 469 government explain the formation of institutional preferences at the time of privatization. The government in power will try to implementthese preferences as policies, and their success will vary according totheir capacity to sustain political coalitions and the constraints and op-portunities deﬁned by state institutions. P ARTISAN BELIEFS AND REGULATORY CHOICES The institutions adopted at the time of privatization reﬂect the role of the state in privatized markets and thus the conﬁdence that policymak-ers have in the liberalization of sectors that have traditionally been con-sidered natural monopolies. The partisan beliefs of policymakers frametheir adoption of technical ideas, including their attitudes toward regu-lation and toward market mechanisms for resource allocation. To assess the inﬂuence of beliefs, I consider indicators that provide for some degree of consistency among previous policies, discourse atthe time of privatization, and electoral statements after privatization.These indicators centered around two areas: economic nationalism andstate intervention. Economic nationalism is important because it wasthe ideology that brought about a generalized nationalization of public470 WORLD POLITICS Similar Economic Conditions Policy Options (Convergence) Politicians’ Implementation Political bias (Beliefs + Constituencies)Similar Technocratic Expertise Institutional ChoicesSelling Conditions FIGURE 1v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 470 utilities in the region.26State intervention has traditionally been used by the literature on partisan policy-making to deﬁne policy preferences.27 Policy indicators of economic nationalism are previous policies restrict-ing foreign investment, nationalization of foreign-owned utilities, hightrade tariffs, and subsidies to promote domestic capital. Policy indicatorsof state intervention are the creation of state-owned enterprises, the ex-tension of the state bureaucracy, and the regulation of labor markets. At the time of privatization, the prior political beliefs that gener- ated these policies inﬂuence the adoption of the new policies. If beliefin economic nationalism is high, the privatization of public utilities ismore likely to include restrictions on foreign ownership and manage-ment, as well as government-deﬁned investment targets in sectors thatprovide fundamental infrastructure for economic development. Con-versely, if belief in state intervention is high, the government is morelikely to create separate regulatory agencies to regulate the privatizedsector and to establish mechanisms within the executive power for theenforcement of regulation. Additionally, delegating power to regulatoryagencies by making them independent of incumbents can fosterlonger-lasting effects in terms of the developmental goals deﬁned at thetime of privatization. Industry specialists will be better prepared to dealwith the issues of industry development, and they are more likely tojoin agencies where their tenure is not threatened by electoral turnover. 28 POLITICAL CONSTITUENCIES AND SELLING CONDITIONS Political constituencies inﬂuence the decisions of policymakers aboutthe selling conditions at the time of privatization. Because privatizationof public utilities involves selling some of the largest assets that can bedistributed and because public services have high public visibility, gov-ernments deﬁne the pricing and selling conditions to consolidate sup-port coalitions. Therefore, the beneﬁciaries of privatization includeunexpected winners that belong to the core constituencies of the priva-tizing government. That is, some of the beneﬁciaries of privatizationPOLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 471 26José Gómez-Ibáñez, “The Future of Private Infrastructure: Lessons from the Nationalization of Electric Utilities in Latin America, 1943–1979,” Working Paper (Cambridge: John F. Kennedy Schoolof Government, Harvard University, January 1999). 27See Boix (fn. 13); and Garrett (fn. 14). 28For the argument about delegation and electoral competition, see Terry Moe, “The Politics of Structural Choice,” in Oliver E. Williamson, ed., Organization Theory: From Chester Barnard to the Present and Beyond (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990). D. Michael Shafer argues that in sectors with high sunk costs, the specialization of the regulators tends to align their interests with those of theindustry. If the winners of privatization are government allies, the creation of separate regulators alsofurthers their common interests with privatizers after the latter leave power; Shafer, Winners and Losers: How Sectors Shape the Developmental Prospects of States (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,1994).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 471 are constant across cases and coincide with the predictions of economic theories. Foreign investors acquired assets in all cases and consumersbeneﬁted when their unsatisﬁed demand was met. In all cases, however,the political leverage of certain sectors within the government coalitionserved to gain them more favorable conditions in the purchase of pri-vatized assets than those predicted by economic theories. 29Hence, all governments are likely to use the distribution of resources derived fromprivatization to favor their political coalitions, but the beneﬁciaries ofthe process should be different, according to who the allies of the pri-vatizing government are. Government coalitions have different characteristics. In most de- mocracies they are deﬁned by partisan coalitions constituted by votersand activists. The traditional view of parties as representatives of differ-ent class constituencies is derived from the Western European experi-ence. That view is the one assumed in the partisan theories ofpolicy-making mentioned above. According to this literature, right-wing parties appeal to upper-class and middle-class voters, whereasleft-wing parties appeal to lower-class and middle-class voters. Al-though most of the partisan theories of policy-making emphasize vot-ers as constituencies, some supporters, such as activists and donors,have easier access to policymakers. In mass parties core constituenciesand activists are important for fostering the support of broad con-stituencies by serving as channels between governments and voters andby providing resources like policy support and electoral campaigning. 30 Although the role of donors is harder to test in countries with little reg-ulation on ﬁnancial disclosure of political activities, the inﬂuence ofdonors on ﬁnancing electoral campaigns is obvious, even if it can bedemonstrated only anecdotally. The Latin American literature views populist parties as different from Western European left-wing parties because, from their origin,they constitute multiclass alliances between the lower strata of societyand some sectors of the upper and middle classes. 31Moreover, the472 WORLD POLITICS 29Whereas some of the winners take advantage of the opportunity based on their economic posi- tioning at the time of privatization, other “unexpected” winners are not strong enough to extract con-cessions in all cases but only when they belonged to the government coalition. 30In deﬁning class constituencies of political parties, Edward Gibson differentiates voters from core constituencies. He notes that “a party’s core constituencies will be more important to the shapingof the party political agenda, particularly for high-stake issues, than noncore constituencies. They willalso play a more important role in the provision of ﬁnancial and ideological resources . . . its relation-ship with its core constituency is the most important of its capacities for becoming a viable political con-tender”; Gibson, Class and Conservative Parties (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996), 10. 31For a view of populist parties as multiclass coalitions, see Michael Conniff, “Introduction,” in Conniff, ed., Populism in Latin America (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1999). See Gibson (fn. 23) for an application of these coalitions to the studied period.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 472 Latin American literature cautions about the weak institutionalization of party systems in the region.32Therefore, any analysis of political coalitions should consider both the importance of social links betweenconstituencies and decision makers and the origins of the govern-ment—whether authoritarian or democratic—and its subsequentdependence on constituencies. Additionally, to link political constitu-encies with the selling conditions of privatization requires consideringwho among the constituencies in the government coalition are notamong the expected buyers, either because they were expected to beamong the losers of privatization or because they have insufﬁcient re-sources to acquire assets. In following this analysis, I assess the bias introduced by constituen- cies in privatization choices as they shape decisions regarding the sell-ing conditions of privatized assets. I measure this bias with thesubsidies or preferential access to the sale given to certain actors whocan be traced to the constituencies of the government coalition. Fa-vored access is granted by rules that subsidize buying instead of tryingto obtain the highest possible market price. Moreover, when the gov-ernment coalition includes the lower classes, the maximization of ﬁscalrevenue can be attributable to the governmental need to commit ﬁscalresources to favor these poor constituencies that cannot acquire directproperty through privatization. In this case privatization is part of alarger strategy of coalition building, which includes government expen-ditures in addition to the allocation of market resources. Table 1 sum-marizes how the political bias of privatizing governments is expected toaffect institutional preferences. III. P UBLIC UTILITY PRIV ATIZATION IN ARGENTINA , CHILE ,AND MEXICO The cases studied here are the privatization of telecommunications inArgentina, Chile, and Mexico and the privatization of electricity in Ar-gentina and Chile. 33Argentina, Chile, and Mexico, among the ﬁrst Latin American countries to embark on privatization, led the way inPOLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 473 32Scott Mainwaring and Timothy Scully analyze the weak institutionalization of party systems; Mainwaring and Scully, “Introduction: Party System in Latin America,” in Mainwaring and Scully,eds., Building Democratic Institutions (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press 1995). 33In contrast to the telecommunications case, President Salinas did not intend to privatize elec- tricity because of an electoral agreement with his labor allies in the electricity sector who opposed pri-vatization. PRIideological resistance to energy privatization was still reﬂected in its electoral platforms for the 1994 and 2000 presidential campaigns. This article focuses only on privatization that has al-ready occurred, thus excluding this case.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 473 the privatization of telecommunications.34Argentina and Chile were also at the forefront of the privatization of electricity.35Moreover, these three countries provide variation in the explanatory variables of interestbecause Chile had a right-wing military government of committedneoliberals whereas Argentina and Mexico were controlled by populistparties that had switched to market policies. 36 In all three countries the governments in power at the time of priva- tization were able to transform their institutional preferences into pol-icy. In Chile a military regime made the government more accountableto its own constituencies than to the silenced opposition. In Mexico’sliberalizing authoritarian government the  PRIcontrolled the presidency and the Congress, and the power of the president to designate his/her474 WORLD POLITICS 34“Countries from the Americas were among the ﬁrst to sell state-owned carriers to foreign in- vestors, and among these, developing nations such as Argentina, Chile, and Mexico sold controllingshare of incumbent carriers to strategic investors”; Trends in Telecommunications Reforms (Geneva: In- ternational Telecommunications Union, 1998), 9. 35Rufﬁn (fn. 2) also ﬁnds a strong regional effect for electricity privatization in Latin America for a sample of seventy-ﬁve countries. 36The Pedersen index measures the volatility of the vote of parties and provides some idea of the links between them and society. The party systems of Argentina, Chile, and Mexico, however, are amongthe most institutionalized in the region. Their lower levels of electoral volatility since their democratictransition reﬂect their strong links with societal constituencies; Mainwaring and Scully (fn. 32), 17.TABLE 1 EXPECTED EFFECTS OF POLITICAL BIAS ON PUBLIC UTILITIES PRIV ATIZATION INSTITUTIONS Partisan Beliefs High Economic Nationalism Low Economic Nationalism Institutional choices limits to foreign direct no limits to FDI on investment (I) investment ( FDI) no I requirements I requirements High State Intervention Low State Intervention Institutional choices on industry-speciﬁc no industry-speciﬁc regulatory agency regulator regulator autonomous regulator no autonomous regulator Partisan Constituencies Populist Right-Wing Military Selling conditions subsidies to allied labor subsidies to military and and business, clauses to state ofﬁcials, no priorityimprove state resources to improve state resources (debt/revenue)v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 474 successor reinforced party discipline.37In Argentina’s democracy the governing Peronist party controlled the presidency and Congress bycombining party discipline and political alliances with provincial par-ties. 38These governments were thus able to implement their institu- tional preferences while adhering to the constraints imposed by theirown governing coalitions and prior beliefs; at the same time, their in-stitutional choices reﬂect their institutional preferences. Because of thecombination of state institutions and political coalitions in power, theyhad no need to make major concessions to the opposition. P ARTISAN CONSTITUENCIES AND BELIEFS OF THE PRIVATIZING GOVERNMENTS This section describes the expectations derived from beliefs and con- stituencies of each of the three administrations for institutional choicesand for selling conditions at the time of privatization. It provides indi-cators that deﬁne the political bias of the privatizing governments in allthree countries. PINOCHET ’SC H I L E :LOW ECONOMIC NATIONALISM ,LOW STATE INTERVENTION ,AND RIGHT -WING CONSTITUENCIES In Chile neoliberal policies began to take shape in 1973 in reaction to the socialist administration of Salvador Allende, which ended in a mili-tary coup in defense of “private property.” The new military govern-ment followed the neoliberal ideas of a group of technocrats trained inthe economics department of the University of Chicago and began theprivatization with the companies nationalized by Allende. 39The “Chicago Boys,” supported by the three largest business conglomerates,POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 475 37Jeffrey Weldon, “Political Sources of Presidencialismo in Mexico,” in Scott Mainwaring and Matthew S. Shugart, eds., Presidentialism and Democracy in Latin America (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997). 38Mark Jones, “Evaluating Argentina’s Presidential Democracy,” in Mainwaring and Shugart (fn. 37). The privatization of telecommunication was done by decree based on a law approved by the Per-onists with quorum of the main opposition party (the Radical Civic Union or  UCR) resulting from a pact between the outgoing president Raúl Alfonsín and the incoming president Menem. This pactmoved up the inauguration date due to a hyperinﬂationary crisis. The privatization of electricity wasapproved by Congress in 1992 despite the opposition of  UCRand left-wing legislators. 39“Privatization was not carried out because of a need to relieve the burden of state enterprises’ deﬁcits; that problem was resolved relatively quickly after the 1973 coup. Rather, the Chicago Boyswere committed to a vision of a decentralized and privatized economy as morally, politically, and eco-nomically superior to the long Chilean tradition of state intervention”; Paul Sigmund, “Chile: Privati-zation, Reprivatization, Hyperprivatization,” in Suleiman and Waterbury (fn. 9), 359–60. See alsoPatricio Silva, “Technocrats and Politics in Chile: From the Chicago Boys to the  CIEPLAN Monks,” Journal of Latin American Studies 23 (May 1991); and Arturo Fontaine Aldunate, Los Economistas y el Presidente Pinochet (Santiago: Zig-Zag, 1988).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 475 took control of the Chilean economy in 1975.40Whereas these tech- nocrats provided Pinochet with an economic program, the armed forceswere responsible for his rise to power. Additionally, the gremialistas, a group of right-wing politicians associated with the Chicago Boys, gavePinochet a political basis for his program. 41Both the gremialistas and the Chicago Boys provided not only civilian core constituencies for thenew regime and connections to the economic conglomerates but alsothe base for the foundation of a new political party, the  UDI(Independ- ent Democratic Union).42 The ideology of the Chilean government combined low support for state intervention with low economic nationalism. The Chicago Boysbased their view of development explicitly on market rather than stateallocation of resources. 43Following this antistatist approach, they started privatization in 1974. Thus, whereas the Chilean state had con-trolled 594 companies in 1973, the process of privatization reduced thenumber to 43 by 1989. 44Privatizations included previously nationalized public utilities. In addition to privatization, public employment was cutby more than 35 percent between 1974 and 1983. 45The government also deregulated the labor market with a 1979 labor law that facilitatedﬁring at will, restricted collective bargaining to the ﬁrm level or togroups of employees, reduced severance payments, and allowed the re-placement of striking workers. 46This administration also liberalized476 WORLD POLITICS 40Eduardo Silva describes the rise of the Chicago-trained economists, supported by the three largest conglomerates (Banco Hipotecario, Cruzat-Larrain, and Matte), to the top of economic policy-making in Chile; Silva, The State and Capital in Chile (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1996). 41Carlos Huneeus shows that the civilians in Pinochet’s coalition included not just the technocrats and conglomerates but also the gremialistas of the traditional right, whose common project with the technocrats was established at the Catholic University. The main leader of the gremialistas was Jaime Guzmán, the main adviser to Pinochet on legal and political issues; Huneeus, “Technocrats and Politi-cians in an Authoritarian Regime: The ‘Odeplan Boys’ and the ‘Gremialists’ in Pinochet’s Chile,” Jour- nal of Latin American Studies 32 (May 2000). 42When Pinochet was president, the coalition was political rather than partisan. However, the coalition resulted in a revamping of right-wing parties in Chile with the creation of UDIand emer- gence of National Renovation out of the traditional right. If the right-wing coalition of UDIand Na- tional Renovation wins the next presidential elections in Chile, their political bias in policy-makingshould have similar institutional preferences but would be of clearly partisan character. 43Schamis (fn. 21) argues that the ideas of the Chicago Boys facilitated Pinochet’s consolidation of his internal rule within the armed forces, thereby increasing their inﬂuence in deﬁning policy-making.Their main economic program, labeled “the brick,” was strongly antistatist and pro–free markets. SeeEl ladrillo: Bases de la política económica del gobierno militar chileno (Santiago: Centro de Estudios Públi- cos, 1992). 44Dominique Hachette and Rulf Luders, Privatization in Chile (San Francisco: International Cen- ter for Economic Growth, 1993), appendix A. 45Ibid., 117. 46René Cortázar, “Chile: The Evolution and Reform of the Labor Market,” in Sebastian Edwards and Nora Lustig, eds., Labor Markets in Latin America (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1997).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 476 trade restrictions.47Additionally, Decree Law 600 and Law 818 of 1974 established liberal and nondiscriminatory conditions for foreign invest-ment, including in the ﬁnancial sector. 48 In 1985 Pinochet’s ﬁnance minister, Hernán Büchi, charged with privatizing telecommunications and electricity, listed four reasons forprivatization: the importance of private property as a foundation for amarket economy, the gain in efﬁciency derived from private control, thestabilization effect of a deepening in the stock market, and the spreadof ownership. 49After the democratic transition, Büchi became Pinochet’s presidential candidate. His electoral platform stated his ex-plicit support for the market as the best method for resource allocationand his advocacy of a nondiscriminatory approach toward foreign in-vestment. 50Hence, the commitment of the Pinochet administration to a low level of state intervention and economic nationalism was still ineffect at the end of his administration. SALINAS ’S MEXICO :HIGH ECONOMIC NATIONALISM ,HIGH STATE INTERVENTION ,AND POPULIST CONSTITUENCIES In Mexico the Institutional Revolutionary Party ( PRI) was in the gov- ernment at the time of privatization. Its traditional constituencies in-cluded a cross-class coalition of organized labor and peasants, alongwith a tacit alliance with domestic entrepreneurs and local bosses. 51At the time of privatization Salinas was strengthening the coalition withcertain sectors of this alliance, including ﬁnancial capital associatedwith the trading of public debt, modernizing sectors in the labor move-ment (labeled the “new unionism”), and its own regional structure ofPOLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 477 47Pinochet abolished nontariff barriers, reduced tariffs to an average of 10 percent, and cut tariff dispersion; Patricio Meller, Un siglo de economía política chilena (1890–1990) (Santiago: Editorial An- dres Bello, 1996), 63. Conservative president Jorge Alessandri (1958–64) had already attempted amodest process of trade liberalization and state retrieval, showing the long-term commitment of theChilean right to the market as the best method for resource allocation. 48Hachette and Luders (fn. 44), 104–5. 49Cited in Eduardo Bitrán and Raúl Sáez, “Privatization and Regulation in Chile,” in Barry Bosworth, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Raúl Labán, eds., The Chilean Economy: Policy Lessons and Chal- lenges (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1994), 342. 50In his electoral program, Lineamientos Fundamentales del Programa de Gobierno (Santiago, 1989), Pinochet’s former ﬁnance minister and presidential candidate Hernán Büchi emphasized theachievements of the military regime in terms of expanding economic freedoms and efﬁciency based onthe development of the market economy and found no fault in the regulation and privatization of pub-lic utilities despite the criticisms in the electoral program of his main contenders; Concertación de Par-tidos por la Democracia, “Programa de Gobierno” (Santiago: Documentos La Epoca, 1989). 51Gibson (fn. 23); Samuel León, “Del partido de partidos al partido de sectores,” in El partido en el poder (Mexico City: Iepes, 1990).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 477 clientelist distribution to the poor PRIconstituencies at the local level based on the National Solidarity Program (Pronasol).52 PRIbeliefs combined high economic nationalism and state interven- tion. The PRIhad previously nationalized public utilities. In fact, PRI president Luis Echeverría nationalized the telecommunications indus-try in 1972. The party had also promoted state intervention. PresidentEcheverría established 160 state-owned companies, whereas his succes-sor created 98 more. 53The PRIhad supported a highly regulated labor market since the approval of the 1931 labor law.54Additionally, in the early 1970s the PRIpassed an investment law restricting foreign capital with the goal of promoting Mexican ownership.55It also established a high level of trade protection and had subsidized domestic capital.56 After the shock provoked by the debt crisis, PRIpresident Miguel De la Madrid, in a policy turnaround in 1985, began to privatize.57His successor, PRIpresident Carlos Salinas, privatized the national telecom- munication company in 1990. However, both De La Madrid and Sali-nas assigned the state a guiding role in the allocation of economicresources. De La Madrid stated: “We have changed the doctrine of theliberal state. From a state which was a mere arbiter of particular inter-ests, responsible solely for law and order, and basic public services, wedeﬁne a state . . . with the capacity to be the rector of national, political,economic and social development.” 58According to Centeno’s study of the Mexican technocratic revolution, De la Madrid and Salina’s modelof national development was not Chile, but Taiwan and Korea. Thus,this thinking went, “the government should not directly control the478 WORLD POLITICS 52Ruth Collier and James Samstad, “Mexican Labor and Structural Reform: New Unionism or Old Stalemate?” in Riordan Roett, ed., The Challenge of Institutional Reform in Mexico (Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 1995); Kathleen Bruhn, “Social Spending and Political Support: The ‘Lessons’ of theNational Solidarity Program in Mexico,” Comparative Politics 28 ( January 1996); Carlos Alba Vega, “Los empresarios y el estado durante el Salinismo,” Foro Internacional 36 ( January 1996). 53Nora Lustig, “Equity and Growth in Mexico,” in Simon Teitel, ed., Towards a New Development Strategy for Latin America (Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank, 1992), 244. 54This legislation makes Mexico one of the most rigid labor markets in Latin America (the ﬁfth most rigid) according to the index presented in John Heckman and Carmen Pages, “The Cost of JobSecurity Regulation: Evidence from Latin American Labor Markets,” Economia , the Journal of the Latin American Economic Association 1 (Fall 2000). 55Lustig (fn. 53), 244; and Gary Gerefﬁ and Peter Evans, “Transnational Corporations, Depend- ent Development and State Policies in the Semiperiphery: A Comparison of Brazil and Mexico,”Latin American Research Review 16, no. 3 (1981). 56Pedro Aspe, El camino mexicano de la transformación económica (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1993), 137–39; Gerefﬁ and Evans (fn. 55). 57Between 1980 and 1982 the transfers from the federal budget to the state-owned enterprises were 3.6 percent of GDP. The pressure from the ﬁscal deﬁcit along with the decline in oil prices in 1981 and the end to foreign ﬁnancing in 1982 brought about the decision to start privatizing; Jacques Ro-gozinski, La privatización en México: Razones e impactos (Mexico City: Trillas, 1997), 101–2, 110. 58Cited by Miguel A. Centeno, Democracy within Reason (University Park: Penn State University Press, 1994), 194–95.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 478 economy but rather serve as an overseer that would impose the disci- pline, order and efﬁciency the system required.”59Indeed, Salinas even coined the term “social liberalism” to incorporate the elements of con-tinuity and change in the policy turnaround. Moreover, the  PRIelectoral platforms for the presidential campaigns of 1994 and 2000 still men-tioned that continued public sector control of strategic sectors was nec-essary to maintain national sovereignty. Thus, belief in some form ofstate intervention and economic nationalism persisted even after theconversion of the  PRIto promarket policies. MENEM ’SA R G E N T I N A :MEDIUM ECONOMIC NATIONALISM ,HIGH STATE INTERVENTION ,AND POPULIST CONSTITUENCIES In Argentina, Peronist president Carlos Menem was in charge of pri- vatization. The Peronist party was a multiclass coalition of organizedlabor, domestic industrialists, and local bosses in the less developedprovinces and suburban areas of Argentina. 60The party’s traditional be- liefs included a combination of high levels of state intervention andmedium levels of economic nationalism. President Juan Perón had na-tionalized telecommunications in 1948, arguing that “telephone andtelegraph services are essential for the economy and the defense of thecountry.” 61He had also created a nationwide public company for elec- tric public utilities in 1947, expanded public sector employment, andestablished regulations that increased the rigidity of the labor market. 62 Perón supported as well protectionism and domestic capital, though hedid not establish barriers for foreign capital. 63In 1973 Peronism re- turned to government after years of being proscribed. Although thisadministration was cut short by a 1976 military coup, its policies whilein ofﬁce returned to state intervention. Its Three-Year Plan was basedon basic industries and state enterprises leading output growth, with apriority placed on state and local companies. 64POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 479 59Ibid., 195. 60Gibson (fn. 23); Murillo (fn. 22). 61Petrazzini (fn. 19), 111. 62During Perón’s administration (1945–55) the national civil service expanded from 203,300 to 394,900; James McGuire, Peronism without Perón (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1997), 58. The IADB index mentioned in fn. 54 ranks Argentina’s labor laws as more rigid than those of Mexico. 63“He expanded credit to industry, raised tariffs, nationalized foreign trade, and directed foreign exchange to industry through a state agency called the Argentine Institute for Trade Promotion ( IAPI)”; McGuire (fn. 62), 58. Yet Perón also tried to attract foreign capital to promote the development of anautomotive industry and also signed petroleum exploration contracts with Standard Oil in 1955, whichwere highly criticized by nationalist groups (pp. 71–72). 64See Federico Sturzenegger, “Description of a Populist Experience: Argentina,” in Rudiger Dorn- busch and Sebastian Edwards, eds., The Macroeconomics of Populism in Latin America (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1990). The previous military government showed a higher level of economicv54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 479 In 1989 the Peronists were back in power and President Menem em- barked on privatization.65As in Mexico, the Peronist conversion to neoliberalism still retained some planning role for the state. Accordingto Menem and his former minister of public works, “It is not possibleto privatize public services and some of the strategic activities of thestate by depriving it of the powers of police (control) and planning (ori- entation).” 66Menem, like Salinas, coined his own term, “popular mar- ket economy,” to deﬁne the adoption of neoliberal policies within thelegacy of the Peronist tradition. Popular market economy was “popular”because it sought to ensure the public good by rewarding work andguaranteeing social and distributive justice while preserving state inter-vention, state orientation, and state planning. It was “market” because itguaranteed economic freedom, private initiative, and competition whiledemanding efﬁciency. 67After Menem ﬁnished his two terms in ofﬁce and had completed the privatization process, the 1999 Peronist elec-toral platform still argued for enacting regulations to promote universalcoverage in water, electricity, and telecommunications. 68Hence, the legacies of state intervention and mild economic nationalism persistedafter the Peronist conversion to the market. SUMMARY The political bias hypothesis predicts that the three administrationsshould include subsidies in the selling conditions of privatization tosatisfy each of their core constituencies. Additionally, their political be-liefs should inﬂuence their adaptation to privatization policies by shap-ing their institutional choices. In Chile weak preferences for economicnationalism and state intervention should decrease the probability ofthe government establishing limits to foreign investment, investmenttargets, and industry-speciﬁc regulatory agencies with autonomy fromthe executive. In Mexico high levels of economic nationalism and state480 WORLD POLITICS nationalism by passing a “buy Argentine” law, which required that the public sector buy goods of local origin and discriminated against foreign-owned companies; Osvaldo Schenone, “Public Sector Behav-ior in Argentina,” in Felipe Larraín and Marcelo Selowsky, eds ., The Public Sector and the Latin Ameri- can Crisis (San Francisco: International Center for Economic Growth, 1991), 15. 65Although Peronist legislators had opposed previous privatization attempts under a Radical pres- ident, the economic crisis reached a peak in 1989, when the GDP dropped by more than 6 percent and the annual rate of inﬂation surpassed 3,000 percent. Menem’s electoral program did not announce hisintention to implement market reforms, including privatization. 66Carlos Menem and Roberto Dromi, Reforma del estado (Buenos Aires: Ediciones Ciudad Ar- gentina, 1997), 109, emphasis in the original; translation by the author. 67Ibid., 42–43. 68Partido Justicialista, “Plataforma electoral: 10 compromisos y 100 medidas para una Argentina mejor” (Buenos Aires: Partido Justicialista, 1999). Yet there were no explicit links to national sover-eignty as in Mexico.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 480 intervention should increase the probability of restrictions on foreign investment, government-deﬁned conditions for investment, and the es-tablishment of new industry-speciﬁc regulatory agencies with auton-omy from the executive. Finally, in Argentina legacies that includemedium levels of economic nationalism and high levels of state inter-vention should imply a higher probability that institutional choices willinclude modest limits to foreign investment or conditions for invest-ment as well as the creation of new industry-speciﬁc regulatory agen-cies independent of the executive. O UTCOMES OF PRIV ATIZATION :INSTITUTIONAL CHOICES AND SELLING CONDITIONS This section presents the institutional choices taken by these adminis- trations and uses the ﬁve case studies to assess the accuracy of the ex-pectations deﬁned in the previous section based on the beliefs andconstituencies of each administration. CHILE :NEOLIBERAL PRIVATIZATION Following the predictions derived from its low level of economic na-tionalism, the Pinochet administration did not set restrictions on for-eign capital in the privatization of electricity or telecommunications. 69 The 1982 electricity law established no obligation of service for gener-ators; 70nor did it impose investment or service targets on the new telecommunications investors.71Additionally, the predictions derived from its low preference for state intervention were also conﬁrmed. TheChilean government did not create independent industry-speciﬁc reg-ulatory agencies for telecommunications or electricity. In telecommu-nications it established the Undersecretary of Telecommunications( SUBTEL ) as an ofﬁce within the Ministry of the Economy and assigned regulatory functions to it. In the electricity sector it gave regulatorypowers to a National Electricity Commission ( CNE) formed by a groupPOLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 481 69The 1978 Supreme Decree 423 of the Ministry of Transportation and Communications explic- itly guaranteed the participation of foreigners in the industry. 70Juan Sebastián Bernstein, “Establecimiento de una política energética basada en el fun- cionamiento de los mercados competitivos y en la participación privada,” Working paper (Santiago: CEPAL , 1995). 71The 1987 telecommunications law gave ten years before the application of maximum terms of two years to provide services in the self-deﬁned areas of concession for providers, although they couldcharge customers in advance for the cost of investments necessary for the installation of the service.The pending demand for telephone services increased after privatization, in particular between 1988and 1992; Jose Ricardo Melo, “La liberalización y la privatización de las telecomunicaciones” (Manu-script, University of Chile, 1993).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 481 of cabinet members.72It did not give enforcement powers to the control agency (Electricity and Fuels Superintendence) it inherited; neither didit maintain any supervision of the independent system operator, incharge of electricity dispatch and controlled by large generators. As expected, the selling conditions, by creating special pricing schemes, beneﬁted the government’s core constituencies, including thetechnocrats in the public administration and the military. Under theprogram of “popular capitalism,” Pinochet also tried to expand owner-ship to create a new class of property owners that would become asupporter of the regime and thereby help avoid any reversion to thefailed socialist experiment of the early 1970s. In the case of electricitythe “popular capitalism” scheme beneﬁted employees, civil servants, themilitary, taxpayers without ﬁscal debts, and especially managers of theprivatized ﬁrms. The latter received shares with voting rights and paidwith loans that used the dividends of the same shares as collateral. Theselling mechanisms also promoted purchase by mutual funds, whichwere the main buyers on the Santiago stock exchange. 73This scheme beneﬁted a domestic business group, which included former govern-ment ofﬁcials and managers of the electricity companies who formed,along with mutual funds, the corporations Enersis, Chilquinta, andGener. 74Additionally, it dispersed ownership among sectors (the mid- dle and upper classes) that were likely to support the right-wing projectof Pinochet in the upcoming plebiscite of 1988. These subsidies,482 WORLD POLITICS 72The SUBTEL was created in 1977 and the CNE in 1978 as part of the restructuring of industries that preceded privatization. Both were part of executive ministries. The new telecommunications reg-ulations of 1987 did not establish an independent regulator either, although the United Kingdom hadalready created  OFTEL , providing some international experience in this area. The antiregulatory stance was maintained by right-wing legislators who hindered the efforts of subsequent center-left adminis-trations to create separate regulatory agencies in these industries. 73These mutual funds had emerged from Pinochet’s privatization of social security, thus linking the outcomes of both reforms. 74These three corporations emerged from the division of the state-owned distribution company Chilectra before privatization. Enersis also acquired control over Endesa, in charge of 60 percent gen-eration and 100 percent transmission in the interconnected central system ( SIC), which accounts for 80 percent of installed capacity in the country. Mutual funds had the majority of shares but lack vot-ing rights, whereas the small percentage of stockholders with voting rights were mostly former gov-ernment ofﬁcials and managers. The head of the Enersis group, José Yuraszeck, had been in thegovernment planning agency and was then appointed as  CEO of Chilectra before its privatization. The head of Gener, Bruno Phillipi, had led the National Energy Commission in charge of electricity pri-vatization; Graciela Moguillansky, La inversion en Chile: el ﬁn de un ciclo en expansion? (Santiago: CEPAL , 1999), 190. Gonzalo Ibañez Langlois from Chilquinta collaborated with Jaime Guzmán in the drafting of the 1980 constitution. Other former government ofﬁcials also joined the boards of thesecompanies: former minister José Piñeira became the president of Chilectra, former minister HernánErrázuriz was on the board of Enersis, and former minister Eduardo Undurraga was on the board ofEntel; Schamis (fn. 21), 66.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 482 however, were given at the expense of state revenue, which could have been used to beneﬁt the poor, who did not qualify for them.75 In telecommunications the same mechanisms were used to distrib- ute shares among the military, civil servants, and employees.76Mutual funds purchased 30 percent of the long-distance company in 1986 and7.6 percent of the local company in 1987. Foreign investors also ac-quired 22 percent of shares in the long distance company  ENTEL and 49.2 percent (along with management) in the local company CTC.F o r - eign investors brought capital, which was not available domestically. Inboth telecommunications and electricity, privatization created strongcompanies relative to the economy as a whole but did not contribute tomaximizing state revenues. 77 MEXICO :POPULIST PRIVATIZATION The high level of economic nationalism in Mexico deterred the priva-tization of the electricity sector, which was constitutionally deﬁned asstrategic. And the privatization of telecommunications included ex-plicit restrictions to foreign management and speciﬁc investment tar-gets for the new providers. 78According to Mariscal, the government was trying to create a “national champion” by restricting foreign controland by granting monopoly rights and imposing investment targets onthe winner. 79POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 483 75A former minister of Pinochet calculated the subsidy implicit in the privatization of electricity distribution as 32 percent for Chilmetro (Enersis), 25 percent for Chilquinta, and 22 percent forGener; Hachette and Luders (fn. 44), appendix 2. Robert Devlin and Rosella Cominetti calculate forthe sale of Endesa subsidies ranging from 7 to 20 percent for public employees, military, small in-vestors, and company employees; Devlin and Cominetti, “La crisis de la empresa pública, las privati-zationes y la equidad social,” Working Paper (Santiago: CEPAL , 1994) The former head of the Mexican Privatizing Unit, Jacques Rogozinski (fn. 57), criticizes the system, arguing that the poor did not re-ceive ownership under “popular capitalism” and explained that for that reason it was not used in Mex-ico (p. 122). 76The navy received shares in the local company CTC and the army in the long-distance one ENTEL ; Melo (fn. 71), 93. 77In 1996 the largest twenty public companies of Chile included Endesa (second), CTC(ﬁfth), En- ersis (sixth), Chilgener (seventh), and Entel (eighteenth). Hugo Fazio , Mapa actual de la extrema riqueza en Chile (Santiago: Lom, 1997), 31. 78The privatization limited foreign capital control of telecommunications and endowed the con- troller of 20.4 percent of Telmex shares, labeled double A, with management voting rights requiringthat 51 percent of those should be Mexican-owned. This restriction on foreign capital also gave an ad-vantage to Mexican business sectors. The 1995 Federal Telecommunication Law also restricted for-eign ownership to 49 percent. 79Judith Mariscal argues this point, that in addition to the ﬁscal arguments supporters of a national monopoly and restriction to foreign control believed in the idea of a “national champion”; Mariscal,Reform in Mexico Unﬁnished Business: Telecommunications (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2002). My own interviews with supporters and opponents of the idea conﬁrm this theory.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 483 The predictions derived from the high level of preference for state intervention imply the existence of an independent, industry-speciﬁcregulatory agency independent of the executive. At the time of privatiza-tion, however, there was no regulatory agency in telecommunications.Regulatory powers remained with the secretary of communication andtransport, who was part of the cabinet and had no autonomy from thegovernment. But in 1995 the government introduced a bill passed asthe Federal Telecommunications Law that created a regulatory agencyfor the industry (Cofetel) with broad regulatory power. Even then, thesecretary of communication and transport restricted its legal autonomyby not deﬁning a clear process for appointing commissioners with ﬁxedtenure. 80 Regarding the selling conditions used to build political coalitions, Salinas took advantage of the privatization of telecommunications bothto reward allies and to raise revenues for enhancing his party’s electoralprospects. This task was particularly urgent because Salinas was electedin 1988 amid accusations of fraud and in the face of a strong showingby the antineoliberal candidate Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, who had leftthe  PRI. Hence, Salinas used privatization to amass political and ﬁnan- cial resources for improving his party’s electoral performance.81Because his coalition included poor sectors that could not participate in theprocess of privatization, he supported the creation of a national mo-nopoly to maximize ﬁscal revenue. 82 Salinas included in his coalition domestic business sectors (especially the ﬁnance sector following his bank nationalization) and “modern”labor unions, while increasing his international credibility and ﬁscal re-sources to expand his popularity. According to the head of the privatiza-484 WORLD POLITICS 80Personal interviews with former secretary of communication and transportation, Carlos Ruiz Sacristán, Mexico City, January 18, 2001; Undersecretary Carlos Cassassus, Mexico City, December 8,2001; and their main economic adviser, Rafael Del Villar, Mexico City, December 6, 2001. Althoughthe law was passed during the administration of  PRIpresident Ernesto Zedillo, it was drafted under Salinas. 81Although Cárdenas was the candidate of the FDN (National Democratic Front), his positions still commanded PRIsupport. Salinas thus had to demonstrate the electoral popularity of his promar- ket policies to his own party activists. According to Kessler, Salinas also used the ﬁnancial resources ofbanking privatization for social policies that would give him electoral returns; see Timothy Kessler,“Political Capital: Mexican Financial Policy under Salinas,” World Politics 51 (October 1998). The in- strument was the National Solidarity Program (Pronasol), which was targeted at competitive districts.The returns of Telmex’s sale in 1990 were 1.19 percent of  GDP and were used to pay internal public debt, thus liberating resources for social spending. Rogozinski (fn. 57), 150; Mariscal (fn. 79), 74. 82In addition to the nationwide local concession, TELMEX was given a nationwide mobile conces- sion, a long-distance monopoly until 1997, and the microwave company Telex of Mexico, thus in-creasing the value of the company. According to personal interviews with the ofﬁcials involved in thesale both in the secretary of ﬁnance and in the secretary of communications and transport, the maxi-mization of ﬁscal revenue explains this arrangement.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 484 tion unit, the privatization of telecommunications was used to maxi- mize revenue, to open the international ﬁnancial markets for Mexicancompanies, to include workers in the process, and to assure Mexicanownership of the company. 83In the case of Telmex, a new domestic ﬁ- nancial group ( CARSO ), in association with Southwestern Bell and France Telecom, won the bid and retained management rights. Thispurchase strengthened a new business group, which would become thelargest in Mexico since the Salinas administration. 84Additionally, the subsidized employee-owned shares (4.4 percent) were syndicated andadministered by the union until their total payment and the rest of theshares went public in the following years. 85 ARGENTINA :POPULIST PRIVATIZATION Regarding institutional choices, the medium level of economic nation-alism inherited by the Peronist party explains why the privatization oftelecommunications and electricity did not include limitations toforeign capital or management but did establish investment targets.Government-established investment conditions were based on satisfac-tion of pending demand and investment targets in telecommunications.Enforcement of these conditions was linked to the extension of theﬁxed-term regional monopoly granted to the winners of the bid. Inelectricity the government established quality standards for the newinvestors. As predicted by the Peronist party’s preference for high levels of state intervention, the government established by decree an autonomous reg-ulatory agency for telecommunications. The appointment of its boardwas competitive, members served for ﬁxed terms that did not overlapwith those of the government, and the agency’s budget was derivedfrom industry taxes. 86As the agency was created only during the bid- ding process, its operation was delayed. In electricity the privatizationlaw of 1992 also created an autonomous regulatory agency with a con-POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 485 83Rogozinski (fn. 57), 126. 84CARSO CEO Carlos Slim ranked as the ﬁfty-fourth wealthiest person in Mexico during the 1980s; by 1999, according to Forbes magazine, he had become the wealthiest person in Mexico and LatinAmerica and the seventeenth wealthiest in the world; Mariscal (fn. 79), 75. Originally a broker, hisfortune grew by selling dollar-denominated government bonds during the 1980s. 85The union leader Francisco Hernandez Juarez was a supporter of privatization and a close ally of Salinas. Murillo (fn. 22), 117–19; Judith Clifton, The Politics of Telecommunications in Mexico (London: Macmillan Press, 2000), chap. 5. 86In spite of the autonomous institutional design described by Santiago Urbiztondo, Daniel Ar- tana, and Fernando Navajas, the agency was often put into receivership due to regulatory conﬂicts withthe executive in the postprivatization period; Urbiztondo, Artana, and Navajas, “ La autonomía de los entes reguladores argentinos: Aguas y cloacas, gas natural, energía eléctrica y telecomunicaciones ,” Working Paper no. 340 (Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank, 1998).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 485 tested process for presidential appointment of directors (congressional agreement was required); there, too, terms were ﬁxed and did not over-lap with those of the executive. The agency also had its own budget ﬁ-nanced by the industry. Additionally, the secretary of energy retainedveto power over the independent system operator in charge of electric-ity dispatch, which included all the actors in the system (generation,transmission, distribution and large users). Menem used selling conditions for coalition building, as well as for reducing outstanding ﬁnancial obligations by swapping debt for priva-tized assets. He thereby increased Argentina’s international credibility. 87 Financial credibility facilitated borrowing to fund Menem’s electoralcoalition, while selling conditions beneﬁted allied domestic business,labor unions, and provincial bosses. 88The national telecommunications monopoly was divided for its sale into two vertically integrated regionalmonopolies. 89Sixty percent of each company’s shares was sold to con- sortia of foreign operators, former state suppliers, and banks holdingArgentine sovereign debt. Employees received 10 percent of shares atlong-term subsidized prices. The trust fund in charge of buying thebloc of shares until its purchase by employees was administered by theunion. In addition, cooperatives in the provinces received 5 percent ofshares, and the rest went public in the following years. 90 Within the electricity sector foreign companies and former state suppliers bought most of the generation, distribution, and transmissioncompanies. In addition to the 10 percent share for workers, which wasalso administered by the union, the labor union acquired four small486 WORLD POLITICS 87The tender terms included a bid for sovereign debt besides the cash requirements. This debt swap contributed to improve the credit rating of Argentina and facilitate its access to private capitalmarkets. 88The value of sovereign bonds in secondary markets had grown from 12 percent in 1989 to 70 percent its nominal value in 1994; Statistical Abstract of Latin America 29, 31 (1995), pt. 2. By contrast, the public foreign debt increased from 61.3 million dollars in 1991 to 99.7 million dollars in 1995,when Menem ended his ﬁrst term, and 148.2 million in 1999, at the end of his second term. Thesefunds, in addition to the revenue from privatization, paid for the increase in provincial expendituresand personnel, which sustained Menem’s political coalition. See Werner Baer, Pedro Elosegui, and An-drés Gallo, “The Achievements and Failures of Argentina’s Neo-Liberal Economic Policies,” Oxford Development Studies (forthcoming); and Edward Gibson and Ernesto Calvo, “Federalism and Low- Maintenance Constituencies: Territorial Dimensions of Economic Reform in Argentina,” Studies in Comparative International Development 35 (Fall 2000). 89Each company was granted half of the country for local communications, and they shared a com- mon company for long distance (Telintar) and another for mobile communications (Miniphone) untilthe opening of the market. Their monopolies were established for seven years with three additionalyears if the companies complied with investment targets. 90Law 23,696 of 1989 and decrees 59 and 62 of 1990 established transfer of companies to the provinces, as well as subsidies for cooperatives, for programs of employee-owned stock, user-ownedstock, and for producers of products or services in the industry of the state-owned company. The unioncharged a fee for the administration of workers’ shares.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 486 generators and two regional transmission companies and provincial cooperatives also entered the generation sector.91In both industries the largest domestic groups—which had grown under the shelter of statesubsidies—bought privatized assets (for example, Techint, Perez-Companc, Clarin, Astra) and used them to increase their economicpower. 92In both industries provincial cooperatives received subsidies, adding another original member of the Peronist coalition to the bene-ﬁciaries of public utility privatization. 93 INSTITUTIONAL CHOICES AND SELLING CONDITIONS :POLITICAL BIAS AND ALTERNATIVE THEORIES The institutional choices deﬁned in the ﬁve cases of privatization stud-ied herein followed patterns similar to those predicted by the politicalbias of the governments involved. In all cases selling conditions fol-lowed coalition-building goals, and prior beliefs shaped the adoption ofnew policies, even in the cases of administrations that had changedtheir traditional policy preferences by shifting from a statist to a pro-market orientation. One ﬁnds the impact of political bias on institutional preferences ex- pressed in the decision on how to privatize rather than whether to pri-vatize. Thus, although the role of prior beliefs did not impede policyadaptation for governments with different prior beliefs, it did hinderconvergence on the same patterns of policy implementation. (Becauseright-wing and populist governments inherited different economic be-liefs, even as all moved toward privatization in a process of policy con-vergence, there were different patterns of policy implementation.) Table2 summarizes the empirical evidence derived from the ﬁve case studieson the political bias produced by prior beliefs on the adoption of insti-tutional choices at the time of privatization. The table shows that the case studies followed patterns similar to those predicted by the political bias hypothesis presented in Table 1. InChile low levels of economic nationalism led to no restrictions on for-POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 487 91Murillo (fn. 22), 160–64. 92The Argentine companies diversiﬁed to various industries in addition to public utilities. In the studied privatizations, Astra participated in electricity, Techint in telecommunications and electricity,Pérez Companc in telecommunications and electricity, and Clarin in telecommunications. The formerthree had been traditional state suppliers, whereas the last one originated in a newspaper that had re-ceived subsidized paper from the state. The thirty conglomerates emerging from privatization (mostlytransnational) represented 17.7 percent of sales and 34.3 percent of beneﬁts of the largest two hundredcompanies in 1995. Within those, the nine domestic conglomerates that participated in privatizationaccounted for only 4.3 percent of the sales, but 14.6 percent of beneﬁts; Daniel Azpiazu, “Elite em-presaria en la Argentina,” Working Paper no.7 (Buenos Aires: Flacso, 1997), 53. 93For the role of the provincial bosses on the Peronist coalition, see Gibson and Calvo (fn. 88).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 487 eign capital and the absence of investment targets. Additionally, beliefs that rejected state intervention resulted in the absence of industry-speciﬁc regulatory agencies with autonomy from the executive. Theseinstitutional choices applied both to telecommunications and to elec-tricity. In Mexico high levels of economic nationalism explain the re-strictions on foreign investment and the establishment of investmenttargets in telecommunications. Prior beliefs of high levels of state in-tervention coincided with the creation of an industry-speciﬁc regula-tory agency for telecommunications, although the prior beliefs cannotexplain the delay in its establishment or the fact that its autonomy wascurtailed by appointment procedures. In Argentina medium levels ofeconomic nationalism were expressed in the absence of restrictions onforeign capital accompanied by investment targets in telecommunica-tions and quality targets in electricity. Prior belief in high levels of stateintervention explain the establishment of autonomous industry-speciﬁcregulatory agencies whose powers include overseeing property concen-tration in both industries. As predicted by the political bias hypothesis, the selling conditions in privatization were used for coalition building. The governments tookthis opportunity for property redistribution to beneﬁt their core con-stituencies and sustain their support coalitions. As a result, the winners488 WORLD POLITICS TABLE 2 PRIOR BELIEFS AND INSTITUTIONAL CHOICES (OUTCOMES ) Chile Argentina Mexico Beliefs and outcomes Telco Elect Telco Elect Telco Belief on economic low low medium medium high nationalism I choices: restriction to no no no no yes FDI I targets or service no no yes yes yes demands Belief on state low low high high high intervention Regulatory choices: no no yes yes yes  separated industry- (ministry (inter- ( CNT)( ENRE ) (late) speciﬁc regulatory ofﬁce) ministry (Cofetel) agency commis- sion) Autonomy of agency no no yes yes no  (appointments-budget) (no ﬁxed terms)v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 488 that emerged were not always those expected by economic theories of privatization. In Chile there emerged new economic conglomerates,such as Enersis, Gener, and Chilquinta, made up of former managers,government ofﬁcials, and the military. In Argentina the privatizingcoalition included the old state suppliers, foreign investors (creditorsand operators), and labor unions, as well as provincial cooperatives. InMexico the privatization of telecommunications included domesticbusiness and the labor union. In both Argentina and Mexico populistgovernments also used privatization to raise state resources that couldserve to fund their political coalition by including their lower-classconstituencies. As shown in the empirical description, the patterns of institutional choices and selling conditions in the ﬁve cases of privatization studiedhere correspond to the predictions of the political bias hypothesis morethan to those of alternative explanations based on policy diffusion, tech-nology, regime, and state capture. Selling conditions in the ﬁve cases re-lated to the goal of fostering political support from core constituencies,and legacies of previous beliefs inﬂuenced the adoption of new institu-tions at the time of privatization. Policy-making theories based on pol-icy diffusion, technology, regime patterns, or business capture of thestate cannot provide a better account for these institutional choices. According to policy-diffusion theories, the competition for foreign capital should have further increased the incentives for regulatory con-vergence among competing countries of the same region within thesame industry. They therefore predict no limits on foreign direct in-vestment and homogenous regulations within each industry across allthree countries. Arguments based on the different levels of technologi-cal change in both industries should also predict no limits on foreigndirect investment and similar regulatory patterns within each industry. 94 Neither theory would predict subsidies in the sale of assets, althoughthe role assigned to the ﬁscal deﬁcit pressures in diffusion theorieswould have predicted mechanisms to maximize revenue in all cases. For their part, regime theories would lead us to expect different po- litical regimes to implement economic policies differently. At the timeof privatization Chile, Mexico, and Argentina had different politicalregimes—military authoritarianism, liberalizing civilian authoritarian-POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 489 94Diffusion and technology arguments assume an effort to improve efﬁciency by attracting capital and taking advantage of technological changes. Thus, they resonate with the “public interest” theoriesof regulation based on the solution of market imperfections to improve economic efﬁciency. See, forinstance, William Baumol, Elizabeth Bailey, and Robert Willig, “Weak Invisible Hand Theorems onthe Sustainability of Monopoly,” American Economic Review 67 ( June 1977).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 489 ism, and democracy, respectively. Authoritarian regimes better insulate technocrats, allowing them to implement privatization with fewer con-cessions. Thus, they should be less likely than democratic regimes bothto establish limits to foreign direct investment and to give subsidies inthe sale of assets. Conversely, authoritarian governments should bemore likely to establish autonomous industry-speciﬁc regulatory agen-cies to avoid future political swings after the transition to democracy. 95 Finally, capture theories perceive every government as captive to thestrong business interests that had supplied state-owned enterprises andtaken over assets once the public coffers were depleted. 96Hence, they predict that powerful economic conglomerates will be able to imposeinstitutional choices and selling conditions on weak governments. Ac-cording to these theories, limits to foreign investment should favor do-mestic capitalists whereas autonomous industry-speciﬁc regulatoryagencies should facilitate capture. Selling conditions should also estab-lish subsidies to enhance the capacity of strong domestic business to ac-quire privatized assets. Table 3 compares the predictions of alternativeexplanations and the political bias hypothesis with the outcomes of theﬁve case studies regarding institutional choices in the implementationof public utility privatization. It shows that the political bias hypothesishas a stronger explanatory power than alternative theories for the ﬁvecase studies analyzed in this article. IV. C ONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS This article shows that despite the policy convergence toward privati- zation of public utilities in Latin America, there was variation in its im-plementation. The political bias of the privatizing governmentinﬂuenced this variation by shaping the choice of institutions and sell-ing conditions. Both dimensions have a strong effect in the postpriva-tization scenario because they affect the power distribution of actors inthe new privatized markets and their ability to inﬂuence subsequentregulatory changes. This argument builds upon a growing literature on the politics of490 WORLD POLITICS 95Delia Boylan explains the logic of “institutional insulation” as a strategy taken by authoritarian rulers to ensure policy continuity after they leave ofﬁce; Boylan, Defusing Democracy: Central Bank Au- tonomy and the Transition from Authoritarian Rule (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2001). This argument resonates with Moe’s (fn. 28) view of insulation as a protection from future policychange in contexts of high party competition. 96Schamis (fn. 21). His argument resonates with the literature on regulatory capture started by George Stigler, “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” in Stigler, ed., Chicago Studies in Political Econ- omy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 490 privatization. It differs from previous work, however, in that it does not restrict political inﬂuence to policy preferences for privatization. Nordoes it limit it to the successful implementation of a technically deﬁnedpolicy based on executive authority, ﬁscal crisis, or concessions to fendoff political opposition. By focusing on implementation, the article de-ﬁnes this inﬂuence in terms of the different dimensions of the privati-zation of public utilities. In doing so, it explains the different choices ofprivatizing policymakers in Chile, Argentina, and Mexico. Moreover,the political bias of privatizing governments explains the formation ofdiverse institutional preferences contingent on the privatizing govern-ment, which are left unexplained by alternative theories based on con-vergence in the competition for foreign capital, regime differences, statecapture, or industry-speciﬁc technologies. The political bias hypothesis involves cognitive and strategic dimen-POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 491 TABLE 3 ALTERNATIVE THEORIES EXPLAINING INSTITUTIONAL CHOICES AND SELLING CONDITIONS Predictions Industry-Speciﬁc Theories Limits to FDI Regulatory Agency Selling Conditions Diffusion none same patterns in each maximization of revenue industry across 3 (ﬁscal deﬁcit)countries Technology none same patterns in each no subsidies industry across 3 countries Regime less likely in authori- more likely in authori- subsidies more likely in  tarian regimes tarian reimes democracies (Argentina)(Chile, Mexico) (Chile, Mexico) Capture all cases all cases subsidies to domestic  capitalists Political high economic high state subsidies to different actors  bias nationalism intervention depending on political  (Mexico > (Argentina, Mexico) coalitions (including mo- Argentina) nopolies to maximize rev- enue for populist coalitions in Argentina and Mexico) Outcomes Mexico > Argentina, Argentina > Mexico, in all cases, depending on none in Chile none in Chile government coalitions +  monopolies in telecommu- nications in Argentina and  Mexicov54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 491 sions that help to explain the origins of institutional preferences for policymakers. Prior beliefs inﬂuence how policymakers adopting newpolicies process information about the world. While they do not distortinformation so as to produce “selective perception,” they also do notdiscard all of their prior beliefs because these are related to their ownsocialization and to that of their core constituencies, who indirectly af-fect their survival in ofﬁce. 97The different starting points provided by the political beliefs of policymakers and their allies explain the differ-ences in implementation of the policies shaped by external pressures byinvestors or international institutions and internal inﬂuence of tech-nocrats for policy diffusion. Additionally, beneﬁciaries of privatization are not limited to those deﬁned by economic or political efﬁciency; they depend on the politicalconstituencies of the government. The effect of political bias, boththrough beliefs and through constituencies, generates preferences fordifferent institutional choices. The institutions that emerge from thosechoices then later inﬂuence the interactions of current and future actorsin privatized markets. Once institutional choices are taken, some roadsare closed. Nonetheless, the institutional choices are not locked into thepath dependency of domestic institutions, because they are contingenton a process of preference formation, which in turn depends on the po-litical bias of the privatizing government. Hence, political bias explainsthe variation in institutional preferences at the time of public utilityprivatization across similar cases, which seem all to be moving in thedirection of policy convergence. This argument has several implications for pursuing new avenues of research. First, if political incentives explain policy choices undertakenat the time of privatization, these incentives should have an inﬂuenceon the policy alternatives available for political parties competing withprivatizers. Electoral competition should provide incentives for alterna-tive policy options in response to demands generated by asymmetricmarkets. Electoral competitors of privatizing governments should seekto attract new investors and consumers to their coalitions by promot-ing regulatory reforms that reduce the gains of incumbent companies.Yet after privatization, the demands of providers and consumers, alongwith technological change and the constellation of coalitions in the492 WORLD POLITICS 97Alan Gerber and Donald Green discuss the debate between Bayesian learning and selective per- ception and ﬁnd more support for the former than for the latter. However, they do not discard the ef-fect of different starting points on the opinions of voters. For instance, Democrats and Republicanssystematically have different levels of presidential approval rates even if they all move in the same di-rection; Gerber and Green, “Misperceptions about Perceptual Bias,” Annual Review of Political Science 2, no. 1 (1999).v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 492 state institutions, should deﬁne the limits of what policymakers can do to follow their political incentives and ideological orientations.98 As predicted by the political bias hypothesis, governments that suc- ceeded the privatizing ones in the three countries studied committed toregulatory change in the privatized industries. In Chile the democratictransition brought to power a center-left coalition that defended the in-terests of consumers and new entrants (at the expense of the originalbeneﬁciaries of the privatization process) by promoting regulatorychange in telecommunications in 1994 and in electricity in 1999. InArgentina the coalition between the centrist  UCR (Radical Civic Union) and center-left FREPASO (Front for a Country with Solidarity) also promoted and implemented changes in telecommunications. Anew regulation established in 2000 facilitated competition and thusbeneﬁted consumers and new entrants at the expense of the originalbeneﬁciaries of privatization. In Mexico the center-right  PAN(National Action Party) administration has proposed a new law to Congress thatwould facilitate competition in telecommunications and abolish the in-vestment requirements established for new investors in the previouslaw. 99 Finally, the importance of telecommunications and electricity for economic development and public satisfaction suggests the politicalsalience of these industries. These are industries where the assets arerelatively valuable for distributing gains among constituencies. Thesefeatures seem to limit the applicability of the notion of political bias toother policy areas of high political importance and distributive conse-quences. Further research into other countries’ economic policies isnecessary to assess the scope of the political bias hypothesis in explain-ing preference formation for policy-making.POLITICAL BIAS IN POLICY CONVERGENCE 493 98These implications are consistent with the view that regulatory votes in the U.S. Congress are more inﬂuenced by party and ideological scores than by interest groups; Roger Noll, “Economic Per-spectives on the Politics of Regulation,” in R. Schmalensee and R. D.Willig, Handbook of Industrial Organization (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publisher, 1989.) 99“Plantean acotar el dominio de Telmex,” El Universal , April 23, 2002.v54.i4.462.murillo  11/5/02  12:16 PM  Page 493