 A c c e l e r a t i n g  t h e  w o r l d ' s  r e s e a r c h . The Role of Subnational Politicians in Distributive Politics: Political Bias in Venezuela’s Land Reform under Ch... M i k e  A l b e r t u s C o m p a r a t i v e  P o l i t i c a l  S t u d i e s C i t e  t h i s  p a p e r G e t  t h e  c i t a t i o n  i n  M L A ,  A P A ,  o r  C h i c a g o  s t y l e sD o w n l o a d e d  f r o m   A c a d e m i a . e d u    R e l a t e d  p a p e r s T h e o r y  a n d  M e t h o d s  i n  t h e  S t u d y  o f  D i s t r i b u t i v e  P o l i t i c s M i k e  A l b e r t u s T h e  D u a l  L o g i c  o f  I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  T r a n s f e r s :  P r e s i d e n t s ,  G o v e r n o r s ,  a n d  t h e  P o l i t i c s  o f  C o a l i t i o n - B … A l e j a n d r o  B o n v e c c h i P o l i t i c a l  a l i g n m e n t s  a n d  d i s t r i b u t i v e  p o l i t i c s  a t  t h e  m u n i c i p a l  l e v e l  i n  f e d e r a l  c o u n t r i e s L o r e n a  M o s c o v i c hD o w n l o a d  a  P D F  P a c k  o f  t h e  b e s t  r e l a t e d  p a p e r s    The Role of Subnational Politicians in Distributive Politics: Political Bias in Venezuela’s Land Reform under Ch´ avez Michael Albertus∗ Assistant Professor of Political Science, University of Chic ago Forthcoming, Comparative Political Studies March 2015 Abstract: This paper examines how the partisanship of empowered sub national politicians can im- pact within-district beneﬁt distribution. I present a theory of the role of subnational politicians in distributive politics, and then test this theory on a distributi ve Venezuelan land reform initiative by leveraging unique individual-level data on revealed voter prefere nces and the receipt of particularistic beneﬁts. Using data from a list of millions of voters that signed petiti ons to recall former President Ch´ avez, I match information on recent land grant applicants to petition s igners to measure how po- litical preferences impact the likelihood of applying for and rece iving land, and how state governors condition this relationship. I ﬁnd evidence for both strategic core vot er targeting and blockage of beneﬁts to opposition voters. These eﬀects, however, are modiﬁed by the political aﬃliation of gov- ernors. The ﬁndings point to the importance of considering how inter vening subnational politicians inﬂuence distributive politics, particularly under federal st ructures. ∗Field work conducted for this paper was supported by an Ayacucho G rant administered by the Stanford Center for Latin American Studies, as well as a Dissertation Research Opp ortunity Grant from the Stanford Oﬃce of the Vice Provost for Graduate Education. I would like to thank Olivier Del ahaye, Rom´ an Duque, Jim Fearon, Steve Haber, Alisha Holland, Karen Jusko, Terry Karl, David Laitin, Carlos Mach ado, Rafael Quevedo, Jonathan Rodden, and Dan Slater for helpful comments on the project. I would also like to th ank seminar participants at the Stanford Com- parative Politics Workshop, the Stanford Center for Latin America n Studies, the University of Chicago Comparative Politics Workshop, and participants at the symposium “Venezu ela From the Neutral Ground” at Tulane University for comments. Finally, I thank Francisco Monaldi for inviting me as a visiting scholar at IESA in Caracas for ﬁeldwork, as well as oﬃcials from the Instituto Nacional de Tierras. 0 1 Introduction Scholars have long recognized distributive politics as a staple of the electoral strategies deployed by modern political parties. Non-programmatic distribution characteri zes politics from the Philip- pines to Taiwan, Argentina to Senegal, and beyond, and occurs even in adv anced democracies (Chen 2013, Kitschelt 2013, Stokes 2005). Yet while politicians often use material res ources to bolster their electoral prospects, the menu of strategies involving particu laristic transfers is diverse. How do incumbent parties allocate particularistic goods to enhance their electoral support? Although the literature on this topic is rich and theoretically sophist icated, there are two main competing explanations for how party operatives will distribute mate rial beneﬁts to individuals or groups to garner votes. On the one hand, if a political party has an advantage at sw aying a particular set of voters because it can more accurately predict its reactions to sp eciﬁc transfers or can more eﬃciently deliver goods to them, then it will target these core vot ers (Cox and McCubbins 1986, Dixit and Londregan 1996). If some voters are already predisposed to one party and cannot credibly threaten to vote against it, however, parties may instead target swing voters (Stokes 2005).1 In part because the unit of analysis in most empirical studies lends a focus on beneﬁt allocation across districts rather than individuals or groups,2few analyses consider that subnational politicians often play an intermediary role between the national governing partie s that supply resources and the local constituents who receive them. Distributive programs with this structure – non-programmatic, individual distribution managed by incumbents with the plausible threat of withdrawal of support – are classiﬁed by Stokes et al. (2013) as clientelism in the form of “manipulat ion of public programs.” Such programs diﬀer from distributive targeting by parties directl y to individuals through local party brokers, which is frequently the case with vote buying and turnout /absention buying. Indistributiveprogramswhereintermediaryincumbentpolitici anseitherdeliverbeneﬁtsfromthe center or are key in “signaling” how distribution should occur, the abi lity of the national governing partytotargetaparticularconstituencyisconditionalonapoliticalli nkwithsubnationalpoliticians. Simultaneously, the ability of individuals to access beneﬁts from t he center is also conditional on the link to political intermediaries. Based on this insight, this paper complements existing literature by 1Of course, parties can simultaneously pursue both strategies with di ﬀerent goods (Albertus 2013). 2See Cox (2009) for a discussion. Several noteworthy exceptions include Gonzalez-Ocantos et al. (2012), Nichter (2008), Stokes (2005), and Stokes et al. (2013). 1 relaxing the implicit assumption of uniﬁed government in such progr ams. It then builds a theoretical framework that acknowledges the critical role of subnational politicians who mediate distributive relations between voters and national-level politicians. The theoretical intuition is as follows. Because of federal structur es, diﬃculties in implementing a national-level program across geographically dispersed locales, and gains i n the precision of tar- geting due to local knowledge, distributive government programs tar geted to individuals are often designed at the national level but strongly inﬂuenced by subnational pol itical actors. If a subnational politician shares a partisan aﬃliation with the executive, they may ai d in targeting beneﬁts to their constituency consistent with the interests of the central govern ing party, whether this is to core or swing groups. Yet if the subnational politician is an opposing party memb er, they may disrupt or sabotage the center’s intended delivery of beneﬁts. The observed d istributive outcome in this case depends critically on subnational autonomy. When subnational politician s have full autonomy and are not denied goods, they can redirect distributive beneﬁts accor ding to their own electoral calcu- lations (e.g., to their own core constituents). But when subnational politicians have only limited autonomy, for instance if they serve principally to “signal” to the cen tral government how to politi- cally allocate distributive goods, or if the center can use alternati ve channels to distribute the same good or attempt to block beneﬁts allocated by the subnational politici an, then the resulting pattern of distribution will be the outcome of competing allocation attempts at b oth levels. For example, if both the center and subnational politicians are attempting to target the ir own core constituents but disrupting each other’s ability to do so, swing voters may become th e ultimate beneﬁciaries. This paper empirically tests several of these theoretical predict ions in the context of the contem- porary and controversial Venezuelan land reform initiative Misi´ on Zam ora using a unique individual- level dataset on revealed voter preferences and the receipt of partic ularistic beneﬁts, paired with the partisan aﬃliation of state governors. Former President Hugo Ch´ avez tappe d the vast resources from Venezuela’s state-owned oil company to ﬁnance a set of large-scale soci al programs ( misiones ), which his successor Nicol´ as Maduro has maintained. Yet despite the size of V enezuela’s social programs, scholarship that suggests that they are being used clientelisticall y (Corrales and Penfold 2011, Pen- fold 2007),3and the foundational role of the poor in supporting Chavismo (Canache 2004), there is still much to learn about how these ongoing social programs are targeted to i ndividuals. 3For a dissenting view, see Hawkins (2010). 2 Land distribution is one of the major social programs, placing it among the m ost important recent land reforms in a region with a long history of such reforms (Albe rtus 2015). Its structure ﬁts squarely into Stokes et al.’s (2013) deﬁnition of manipulation of public pr ograms: land distribution is characterized by non-programmatic, individual distribution contr olled by central incumbents with the reasonable threat of withdrawal of support. From the time the National Lan d Institute (INTi) centralized operations in 2007 until the February 2009 constitutional refe rendum for indeﬁnite presi- dentialre-election,145,000individualsappliedforlandgrants. Howarelan dgrantstargeted,andhow are the distributive patterns impacted by subnational politicians? These questions can be answered with particular precision due to the availability of voter information . In late 2003, over 3 million of Venezuela’s 12 million registered voters signed a petition to recall Ch´ avez from oﬃce, forcing a recall referendum. Well over a million Ch´ avez supporters simultaneous ly signed a counter-petition to recall opposition politicians. The list of recall petition and counter-petit ion signers was merged with infor- mation on the universe of registered voters in Venezuela and packaged in to a database ( Maisanta ) that was then distributed throughout the bureaucracy and leaked to the public. Allegations soon arose that this list was being used in hiring public employees and d istributing social beneﬁts. The analysis here employs Maisanta directly to link land applicant information to voter lists to determine how signing the petition to recall Ch´ avez or the petiti on to recall opposition politicians aﬀects the likelihood that an individual applies for a land grant and the likelihood of receiving a grant conditional on applying.4I ﬁnd that land applications are somewhat more common among strong Ch´ avez partisans that may be more easily mobilized. Pro-Ch´ avez indi viduals are also signiﬁcantly more likely to receive land conditional on applying – clear evidence of the central government’s politicization in allocating social beneﬁts. This is consistent wi th Cox (2009), who argues that a highly polarized electorate with few swing voters such as that in Vene zuela (Ortega and Penfold 2008) should induce a party to target transfers to core supporters. This i s particularly true when mobilization is an attractive strategy (Cox 2009, Nichter 2008), a condition that h olds in Venezuela given a highly variable turnout rate amidst a host of referendums and pre sidential and parliamentary elections. I also ﬁnd, consistent with the theory advanced here, that the distr ibution of beneﬁts is modiﬁed 4ThoughthedatausedhereareallfortheperiodpriortoCh´ avez’sdeath , supportfororopposition to Ch´ avez remains a key cleavage in Venezuela under Maduro. 3 bythepartisanshipofstategovernors. Thoughgovernorsdonothavedire ct, autonomouscontrolover land allocation, they are crucial ﬁgures in signaling to the center how the land reform program should be targeted and in facilitating or inhibiting the center’s targeting attempts. Whereas strong Ch´ avez supporters are more likely to receive land reform beneﬁts in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors, they are less likely to receive grants in opposition-held states. Pro-Ch´ avez governors facilitate land grant targeting and signal that their states are politically deserving, where as opposition governors inhibit land distribution. At the same time, Ch´ avez opponents in regions wit h anti-Ch´ avez incumbents are signiﬁcantlylesslikelytoreceiveland, whichsuggeststhatthec entercaneﬀectivelydenythepolitical opposition from receiving land reform beneﬁts by negating opposition gov ernors’ targeting strategies. Further analyses that take into account the time required for INTi to p rocess land grant applications as well as potential “bureaucratic delay” support these ﬁndings of polit ical bias, as does an analysis of whose applications have been eﬀectively rejected by INTi. In shor t, the national government is very discerning in granting beneﬁts, and even bureaucratic delay has a political logic rather than a lack-of-competence logic. Subnational politicians are well aware of thes e patterns and attempt to facilitate or complicate targeting. Theavailabilityofadatabaseonbeneﬁciariesisparticularlyadvantageous giventhat,asGonzalez- Ocantos et al. (2012) demonstrate, the use of self-reported beneﬁts as in m any existing studies of targeteddistributionmaybesubjecttosocialdesirabilitybias. Togetherwiththe Maisanta data, this paper is able to present the ﬁrst analysis of a distributive program at t he individual level using data on revealed voter preferences and the receipt of particularistic be neﬁts. Yet while these data from Venezuelaprovideauniqueopportunitytocloselyanalyzeadistr ibutiveprogram, thephenomenonof individual targeting in countries with powerful subnational politi cians is far from uncommon. Stokes et al. (2013) argue – with evidence from cases as diverse as Argentina, India, M exico, and Venezuela – that the typical clientelist political machine is bottom-heavy and decentralized, enabling local party operatives to micro-target voters by making good inferences about indi viduals’ likely votes based on factors such as their job, membership in organizations, and aﬃliation with neighbors.5The countries examined by these authors have strong federal structures that can en able subnational authorities to intervene in voter targeting, as well as partisan fractionalization at diﬀe rent levels of government that 5Individual targeting can also be eﬀective in unconditional distribu tive programs characterized by partisan bias (e.g., Chen 2013). 4 gives them the incentive to do so.6Findings from Venezuela, therefore, may be applicable to these and other contexts where multilevel politics ﬁlters distributi ve programs targeted at individuals. 2 The Role of Subnational Politicians in Conditioning Voter Tar- geting Testing theories of distributive politics at the individual leve l enables both a greater understand- ing of the allocation of beneﬁts within districts and an examination of th e local political interactions that are often critical to voters receiving beneﬁts. If beneﬁts are administered to constituents by functionaries that answer directly to the executive (e.g., ideal- type populism), subnational politicians may play little role in a distributive program. But targeted programs of ten rely upon intermediaries because of federal structures, diﬃculties in implementing a nat ionwide program across a wide spa- tial range, and advantages in the accuracy of targeting due to local knowledge . A within-district empirical analysis enables modeling how subnational politicians int eract both with individuals in their district and with the central government in ways that impact ultimate voter targeting patterns. Depending on their political incentives and degree of autonomy, these subnational actors can become key players in either facilitating or inhibiting the center’s i ntended targeting of beneﬁts. Several important recent contributions have shed greater light on the role of local intermediaries – especially brokers – in distributive politics. Stokes et al. (2013), for instance, prominently argue that information asymmetries lead local brokers to target loyal partisans even though national-level party leaders prefer targeting swing voters. Yet brokers are not the on ly intermediaries that can inﬂuence the allocation of distributive beneﬁts originating from par ty leaders. Szwarcberg (2012), for example, notes that potential voters often access beneﬁts at rallies . By controlling rules for how parties conduct rallies or restricting permits, local politicians can aﬀect the receipt of party beneﬁts. Local incumbents can also directly administer the allocation of beneﬁ ts. Auyero’s (2001) work on slum dwellers in Buenos Aires demonstrates in detail how local Peron ist oﬃcials administered and publicized clientelistic projects. Weitz-Shapiro (2012) examin es how local mayors across Argentina become personally involved in distributing beneﬁts through a nation al food program that aﬀords 6Thisideahassomeparallelintheﬁscalfederalismliteraturethatex amineshowpartisanalignment aﬀects intergovernmental transfers. 5 discretion over program implementation. Both of these latter studies highlight how subnational politicians can claim credit over decentralized distributive pr ograms to win constituent support. No previous contributions, however, have explicitly focused on th e distributive implications of interac- tions between the center, subnational politicians, and individual v oters. When it comes to understanding distributive patterns in client elistic government programs me- diated by subnational politicians,7it is critical to recognize that the relevant political intermediari es are those that act as gatekeepers of a distributive good between national- level incumbents and voters. Patterns of distribution depend on the targeting strategies of both the executive and the relevant subnational gatekeepers – strategies that need not be symmetric across l evels of government. The autonomy these gatekeepers have in distributing beneﬁts is also cr itical: whereas fully autonomous gatekeepers can entirely redirect beneﬁts as they choose, gatekeep ers with limited autonomy – as in Venezuela’s land distribution program – serve to facilitate or disrup t the center’s targeting strategy. Consider four distinct ideal-type scenarios in which the central go verning party (Party A) at- tempts to target its core supporters with beneﬁts in a particular re gion. In each scenario, subnational gatekeeper politicians have their own political incentives for del ivering beneﬁts to voters. I assume for ease of presentation here that subnational politicians also attempt to target their own core voters, for instance because voters are ideologically polarized and turnout is vari able. The four scenarios and the patterns of distribution they are expected to generate are dis played in Table 1.8 The subnational politician in the ﬁrst two scenarios is an opposition mem ber from Party B and therefore has incentives to disrupt or sabotage the delivery of ben eﬁts to core supporters of the governing Party A. The expected patterns of distribution in the se scenarios depends on the 7Though I principally focus on clientelism via the manipulation of pub lic programs, the fact that local politicians can also impact how brokers interact with voters (e. g., by restricting party rallies) implies that the theory is not merely limited to government-contr olled distributive programs. 8Though the discussion and Table 1 focus on a center core strategy and a sub national politician core strategy, the link between the center and voters can be interru pted by subnational politicians regardless of the central governing party targeting strategy (core vers us swing), the subnational politician targeting strategy (core versus swing), and the ideological com position of district voters. Predicted outcomes are driven by a logic analogous to that below. The natur e of the Venezuelan case does not therefore limit the scope of the theory. 6 degree of autonomy subnational politicians wield over distribution. Con sider ﬁrst the case of an opposition subnational politician with full autonomy . In this ﬁrst scenario, subnational politicians have sole discretion over the distribution of goods that come from the center and that can be used for particularistic aims to court constituents. Opposition subnational p oliticians can therefore redirect beneﬁts according to their own electoral calculations rather than the center’s. If they target their own loyalists, we would expect to observe a Party B core targeting str ategy in their district.9 What if the subnational government does not have sole discretion over the distributive good, in that the governing party can (i) completely manage distribution from the center; (ii) use alter- native channels to distribute the same good (or some portion of them); or (iii) attempt to block beneﬁts allocated by the subnational politician? This second scenari o is therefore characterized by anopposition subnational politician with limited autonomy . If an opposition politician tries to steer beneﬁts toward the Party B core, the national governing party may disr upt transfers. This could occur, for instance, by selectively denying nationally controlled beneﬁts to opposition supporters through direct or indirect (e.g., probabilistic) screening mechan isms. Yet opposition subnational politicians can also use the powers and tools at their disposal to discou rage or complicate the ability of the central Party A to target its core voters. This can occur, for inst ance, through campaigns of misinformation, actions that raise the cost of beneﬁt distribution, and selective local enforcement of the law. With beneﬁts largely blocked to both Party A and Party B core c onstituents, ideologically indiﬀerent swing voters would therefore be the main beneﬁciaries .10 Now consider two scenarios in which the subnational politician is from t he same Party A as the incumbent national government. In scenario three, characterized b y analigned subnational politician with full autonomy , the subnational politician can redirect beneﬁts according to their own electoral calculations as in the ﬁrst scenario above. If the subnational politici an targets the Party A core, we should observe beneﬁts ﬂowing to Party A supporters in their di strict. In scenario four there is analigned subnational politician with limited autonomy . A subnational politician that targets Party A core constituents consistent with the interests of the central go verning party would again yield 9If instead the subnational politician chose to target swing voters in th is case, we should observe a swing strategy. 10An opposition subnational politician that instead attempts to target swing voters in their district in this case would ultimately yield some combination of swing and core tar geting. 7 an observed Party A core strategy in their district. Importantly, only in these scenarios three and four would distributive theories that ignore the role of subnational poli ticians correctly predict the observed outcomes. As will be discussed below, scenario two with limited subnational autonomy most closely rep- resents Ch´ avez’s land reform in opposition states. Scenario four bes t captures the land reform in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors. 3 The Role of Subnational Politicians in Venezuela’s Land Reform ThecentralizedadministrationofVenezuela’slandreformalongsidegeogr aphicallydisperseddemand for reform and the importance of subnational politicians in rural distrib utive politics makes its reform program ideal for testing theory on the role of subnational partisanship in c onditioning particularistic distribution. Ambiguity in the Land Law and the wide margin for interpre tation and implementation by government bureaucrats also renders Venezuela’s land reform sub ject to political bias. Venezuela’s status as a hybrid regime further makes it an excellent candidate for studying the widepread and politically biased distribution of goods. In a fully aut ocratic regime, the lack of electoral pressure should diminish the executive’s incentive s to seek an electoral advantage through thewidespreaddistributionofgoodsinapoliticallybiasedfashion. Thepoliticallybiaseddistribution of goods in a democracy may be more concealed or constrained – though hardly eliminated, as demonstrated by the rampant clientelism in democracies such as Argen tina, Brazil, Mexico, and India. By contrast, hybrid regimes face electoral pressures to engage i n politicized clientelism and few of the restraints that democracy often imposes. The 2001 Law of Land and Agrarian Development set forth a number of ambitious goals. T he main provisions called for land distribution to the poor, a tax on unexp loited land, and a landhold- ing ceiling. The key institution charged with administering the l and reform is the National Land Institute (INTi), which registers and regulates both public and pri vate property, and also manages the distribution of land in accordance with the law. Begun as a decentr alized process with regional INTi oﬃces registering and distributing land, the reform only aﬀecte d state-owned property until 2005. The Land Law was strengthened and amended in that year, in part to overcom e Supreme Court annulments (Duque 2009). Peasants can now legally occupy private lan d if they hold cartas agrarias, or usufruct certiﬁcates valid until legal disputes over ownersh ip are settled. The chief source of land for redistribution are “latifundios,” deﬁned under the 2005 law as properties larger than the 8 regional average and with a yield less than 80% of that suitable to its exten t (Article 7). Yet there is no complete property registry or a classiﬁcation of soils according to th eir productivity. Deﬁnitions of farm productivity thus leave a wide margin of interpretation for gov ernment functionaries (De- lahaye 2006, Duque 2009), who have established varying criteria and applie d them unevenly across diﬀerent regions. Shifting deﬁnitions of property rights and ambigui ties in the Land Law have led to opposition from private property owners and allegations of political bias in the Law’s administration. In 2007, INTi’s organizational structure changed under the amended Land Law, tr ansferring ﬁnal decisions on property registration and land distribution to its ce ntral oﬃces in Caracas. INTi’s regional oﬃces, typically in state capitals, nonetheless serve import ant functions. Individuals apply for grants, including cartas agrarias , through these regional oﬃces. After their own review, and often after coordination with state governors where there is political agreem ent, these oﬃces then forward applications to Caracas. Individuals also must have regional INTi oﬃcials i nspect and certify their property claims and report their ﬁndings to INTi’s central oﬃces. As a r esult, regional land reform oﬃcials in concert with state governors impact the application and land di stribution process. INTi’s regional oﬃces, however, are ultimately headed by bureaucrats t hat are appointed by INTi’s president, who is named by the national executive. It is cons equently easier for pro-Ch´ avez politicians to help their supporters, which is consistent with ot her evidence that discretionary trans- fers have been channeled to subnational authorities with party aﬃnit ies to Ch´ avez (de la Cruz 2004). Nonetheless, opposition politicians, while facing political obstacles in aiding their own supporters, retain considerable capacity to inhibit grants to pro-Ch´ avez indivi duals in their jurisdictions. This capacity (termed “limited autonomy” above) derives from Venezuela’s federal structure. 3.1 Governors as Gatekeepers: Signals in Facilitating and Inhibiting L and Grants State governors play a particularly important role in the administrati on of Venezuela’s land reform. Though they do not have autonomous control over land distribution and ther efore do not make ﬁnal allocation decisions, their actions and partisan aﬃliations serve as signal s that can either facilitate or inhibitthetargetingoflandgrantstoindividualsandgroupswithintheirjuri sdictions. Governorsare well equipped to access and use group-based and individual information about land applicants due to interactions both with regional INTi oﬃcials that have detailed inform ation about land applicants (includingindividuals’nationalidentitynumbers)andwithland -basedinterestgroupsandpetitioners 9 whose activities and aﬃliations are informative. Governors therefore n ot only signal which regions are politically deserving of reform, but also which individuals wit hin those regions are deserving. To facilitate grants, governors can publicize the land program in speech es and ceremonies and through public expropriation proceedings to encourage speciﬁc groups an d individuals to apply for land, and then follow up directly with these individuals or indire ctly in concert with regional INTi oﬃces. Governors can also help INTi identify properties to distrib ute, increasing the pool of potential land grants in their state. Close coordination of this type between INTi and state governors is seen in a number of examples. In expropriating and dividing the El Toco e state in a public ceremony in Gu´ arico, the pro-Ch´ avez governor Willian Lara signaled that facilitatin g the land reform was part of his mandate in oﬃce, and “therefore, we accompany the peasants and INTi in t aking the wise decision to advance the legal process to deliver land to organized, smal l-scale producers.” He then invited land applicants to meet with him personally to advance their petitions. In the case of the San Luis estate in Calabozo, Gu´ arico, Governor Lara personally presided over the expropriation together with the regional INTi coordinator Fernando Colmenares and the Minister of Agriculture. Lara met directly with those petitioning INTi for the San Luis land. Lara, wit h Colmenares at his side, could reasonably assess applicants’ partisan aﬃliations. One applicant in this case, for instance, was an employee that worked for the Foundation for Training and Innovation to S upport the Agrarian Revolution, which formed within the Ministry of Agriculture; the e mployee was thus a clear pro- Ch´ avez partisan. Hugo Ch´ avez’s brother Ad´ an Ch´ avez has similarly work ed closely with INTi as the governor of Barinas, pledging his “enormous commitment to providin g support” to INTi and leveraging his connections as a former INTi director to bring visibil ity to the program – including hosting INTi events directly in the governor’s oﬃces – and facilitate its expansion in his state. In many similar cases, these and other governors directly meet INTi app licants and personally hand over land grant certiﬁcates to beneﬁciaries in public ceremoni es. Applicants themselves may facilitate partisan targeting. Members of the peasant group Argimiro Gabald´ on in La Estancia, for instance, openlypetitionedINTiforlandusingasjustiﬁcationthatMai santaindicatedthelandowner signed against Ch´ avez and thus supports counter-revolutionary latifundismo ; the clear (and stated) implication was that the applicants were strong Ch´ avez partisans.11 Finally, pro-Ch´ avez state oﬃcials can aide individual applicants in an e ﬀort to credibly claim 11The owner’s land title was revoked under Proceeding No. 14-13-0506-0011-RT. 10 credit over reform progress. Governors, for instance, personally hos t meetings between potential applicants and high-level government actors from institutions that col laborate with INTi in ﬁnancing reform beneﬁciaries and providing loans and technical assistance (e. g., the Bank of Venezuela). Such meetings facilitate coordination among potential applicants, encouraging greater and more informed participation in the program, as has occurred with its repeasantization p rograms (Page 2010). The coordination with INTi to host these meetings provides an easy conduit through which applicant information can ﬂow. Governors opposed to land reform can also inhibit the success of the pr ogram and inﬂuence its targeting. These governors, and the signals they send about distributi on, typically work at cross- purposes with the regional INTi oﬃce in their state. First, opposition go vernors can use state police to selectively deter land invasions and shield private property fr om reform. This occurred frequently in the opposition states of Carabobo under Henrique Salas Feo and Zulia und er Pablo P´ erez. The latter explicitly bolstered the state police to deter illegal invas ions such as those by the Yukpa in MachiquesdePerij´ a.12AswiththeYukpa, oppositiongovernors’eﬀortsonthisfrontcouldbegreat er inpro-Ch´ avezareasorareaswheretherearepro-Ch´ avezlandinvaders, w ithsuchinformationgleaned by the state police, invaders’ aﬃliations with or appeals to the regional I NTi oﬃce, or precinct-level electoral results. Indeed, this use of state police is likely one ma jor reason why the national guard is employed to seize the properties of prominent opposition politician s in these regions. Even in these more prominent seizures, however, the typical presence of INTi lan d petitioners (who may have invaded the property) makes their identities knowable to the stat e police and to governors. Second, opposition governors can publicly denounce the reform as depressing agr icultural production and instigating violence, or as funneling state resources to a small minor ity of voters, crafting targeted appeals to the majority of voters who will not apply for land grants or are sen sitive to allegations of poor government performance (see, e.g., Weitz-Shapiro 2012). Oppositi on governors such as C´ esar P´ erez Vivas of T´ achira, Henrique Salas Feo of Carabobo, Henrique Capriles of Miranda, and Pablo P´ erez of Zulia have all strongly spoken out against the reform in this wa y. Finally, state oﬃcials can discourage local property registration and with hold updated cadastral information from the government, making it more diﬃcult for INTi to ide ntify properties to target or to resolve speciﬁc peasant claims. This is a particularly useful t ool since INTi has been trying 12The expulsion of squatters ceased with PSUV governor Francisco Arias C´ ardenas’ 2012 election. 11 to examine property rights nationwide to better target properties to reform, and state oﬃcials co- ordinate and catalyze the construction of local-level cadastres. In one of the most egregious cases illustrating the value of cadastral information, the INTi regional oﬃce in t he then-opposition state of Zulia was burned down shortly after an INTi announcement for the expr opriation of a set of large estates in the state (mostly of opposition landowners); key land regist ry documents were destroyed. Of course, these mechanisms are not mutually exclusive. Governors can, and have, pursued several of these strategies simultaneously. Doing so has frustrated C h´ avez supporters. As a Ch´ avez party (PSUV) mayoral candidate for the capital of the former opposition state of Zulia complained, “it is a regional government that blocks the misiones and social programs from arriving to Zulia.” Theimplicationsofthisdiscussionforobservedpatternsoflandgrantt argetingareclearwhenone takes into consideration the overall political context. Venezuela h as a highly polarized electorate with few swing voters (Ortega and Penfold 2008), and a highly volatile turnout rat e against a backdrop of numerous referendums and presidential and parliamentary elections makes voter mobilization a key determinant of electoral success. Both of these factors, which operate nationally and subnationally, heavily favor core targeting (Cox 2009, Nichter 2008). Consequently, Venez uela’s land reform at the regional level should correspond closely to scenarios two and four in Sec tion 2 above, with the center and the aligned and opposition subnational politicians attempting to target their core supporters. The theoretical discussion thus yields three clear, testable hyp otheses: H1: Pro-government individuals should be morelikely to receive beneﬁts than opposition or unde- clared individuals in regions where state governors are of the national gov ernment’s party. H2: Pro-government individuals should be lesslikely to receive beneﬁts than undeclared individuals in opposition-held states. H3: Opposition individuals should be lesslikely to receive beneﬁts than undeclared individuals in opposition-held states. 3.2 Electoral Payoﬀs to Distributive Targeting in Venezuela’s Land R eform For a distributive program to have electoral payoﬀs, beneﬁciaries mu st support the politicians deliv- ering them material goods. Why do they do so in this case? Unlike vote buying in which incumbents and challengers can broadly distribute contingent rewards on or near elec tion day (Gans-Morse et al. 2013; Stokes et al. 2013), land is only granted by incumbents to applicants. An d although land grants were awarded in a wave just prior to voting, many individuals app lied before the campaign. 12 Yet while land grants do not qualify as vote buying, they nonetheless con stitute manipulation of public policy (see Stokes et al. 2013). First, land is granted provision ally, which enables con- ditionality. Beneﬁciaries are granted usufruct or other provisional r ights until deﬁnitive ownership over a property is established. Even when land is cleared for distr ibution, recipients must exploit the property according to its ambiguously deﬁned “social function” for at least two years to receive formal title. This leaves bureaucrats a mechanism to sanction potent ial defectors and maintain voter support. Second, politicians distributing land in rural communiti es do so in the context of dense political and social networks. Rural voters are often less geographically m obile, and neighbors may be local political operatives who are diﬃcult to mislead about one’s vote . Proximity to dense local political networks increases access to distributive goods (Calvo an d Murillo 2013), and enables oper- atives to elicit greater loyalty (Auyero 2001) and feelings of reciprocit y (Finan and Schechter 2012) among beneﬁciaries. Given this arrangement and a polarized electorate w ith few swing voters but variable turnout, core targeting is an attractive strategy (Gans-Morse et al. 2013).13 4 The Rise of Ch´ avez and the Maisanta Database Former Venezuelan president Hugo Ch´ avez came to oﬃce after the 1998 pres idential election on an anti-corruption and anti-poverty populist platform. Following the 1999 passage of a new constitution and another round of elections, Ch´ avez used his electoral mandate to pass a package of 49 laws by presidential decree in 2001. The decree initiated the Law of Land and Agrarian Development. In 2002, groups in opposition to Ch´ avez and his new economic policies began to c ollect signatures to petition for a recall election. The ﬁrst two petitions were reje cted on technical grounds. Under the supervision of the Electoral Council, the opposition initiated a thir d recall petition drive calling for a binding vote to remove Ch´ avez from oﬃce. Of the 12 million registere d voters, over 3 million signed the third petition between November 28 and December 1, 2003 at signing st ations administered by the Electoral Council. At the same time, Ch´ avez supporters began a counter-petition to recall opposition legislators. Well over a million people signed this counter -petition. The 20% recall vote threshold was reached. Ch´ avez won the recall referendum in August 2004 w ith 59% of the vote. 13The much smaller pool of swing voters along with the more conditional natu re of land grants leads to a diﬀerent distributive logic to land grants than in the prev ious Punto Fijo era of land reform from the 1960s-1990s (see Albertus 2013). 13 The identity of the recall petition signers was made public in the ear ly stages of the opposi- tion’s recall drive. The pro-Ch´ avez congressman Luis Tasc´ on posted a l ist of signers of the ﬁrst petition on his website, ostensibly so that citizens could ﬁnd out i f their signature was forged by the opposition and appeared on the petition. Tasc´ on updated the list for t he second and third peti- tions, and the Electoral Council posted similar lists. Ch´ avez threat ened to retaliate against petition signers on nationally broadcast television addresses, and encouraged them to withdraw their recall signatures. In 2004, the list of signers of the third petition was compiled into a database known as “Maisanta,” which included information on all 12 million registered vote rs in March 2004. The list of counter-petition signers was also incorporated into this databas e. The Maisanta software was widely distributed after the 2004 election, and its contents demonst rate that its creators merged voter information with administrative data from the government’s soc ial programs. A Maisanta user who enters an individual’s identity card ( c´ edula) number immediately gains access to their name, address, birth date, and whether they participate in various governm ent social programs. Most importantly for this study, the database also indicates whether t he individual signed the thirdandﬁnalrecallpetition,thecounter-petitiontorecallopposi tionoﬃcials,orneither. Individuals who signed the third petition are therefore those most likely to be i dentiﬁed as strong partisan opponentsofCh´ avezafter2004, andthosewhosignedthecounter-petitionm ostlikelytobeidentiﬁed as strong Ch´ avez supporters ( chavistas ). Indeed, there soon arose allegations that the Maisanta program had been used by public sector employees topunishCh´ avez op ponents, and there is evidence that it had indeed been used to screen job applicants and ﬁre Ch´ avez op ponents (Jatar 2006), as well as to screen applicants for government ID cards and remedial educ ation programs (Hawkins and Hansen 2006). Ch´ avez himself suggested as much, stating in a cabinet meet ing that “There are still places that use Tasc´ on’s list to determine who gets a job and who does n’t.” Though it is entirely possible that INTi functionaries directly use d Maisanta in allocating land grants since individuals provide their c´ edulanumber in their application, and revealed this infor- mation to governors, this need not be the case for the argument or the empi rics to hold. Rather, functionaries could have used other informative clues about partisans hip to direct grants in concert with governors, so that Maisanta simply provides us here with an esp ecially accurate measure of partisanship at the individual level that can be used to test the the ory. 14 5 Research Design and Data The analysis seeks to determine how the partisanship of governors con ditions distributive bias in the administration of Venezuela’s land reform program. There are two particu larly unique aspects of this analysis. First, I have data on actual petition signing as well as th e database the government used to target the opposition. Second, I have data on all land applicants , including those that were successful in receiving a land grant. By matching land applicant inf ormation to voter lists using an individual’s c´ edula, or national identiﬁcation number, I can distinguish the eﬀect of one’s political preferences for or against Ch´ avez on both the likelihood of applying for a land grant as well as the propensity for receiving a grant conditional on applying. I also exami ne the role of governors in distribution. That the national-level program is structured simi larly across states ensures that diﬀerences in implementation are not a function of program characterist ics but rather subnational incentives to inﬂuence the scale or character of participation. 5.1 Dependent Variables: Land Grant Applicants and Beneﬁciaries The ﬁrst part of the analysis seeks to determine whether Ch´ avez su pporters are more likely to apply for land grants. Because the data here were collected after the recall r eferendum when the Maisanta database was already widespread, potential land grant applicants who signed against Ch´ avez may have been less likely to apply for a grant with knowledge that their p olitical preferences could be used against them. At the same time, potential land grant applicants who s igned the counter- petition in support of Ch´ avez may have been more likely to apply for a grant, expecting that their support for Ch´ avez would increase their likelihood of receiving a grant. Of the 12 million registered voters in 2004, there were over 115,000 that applied for at least one of INTi’s program s (yielding 145,000 applications) between April 2007 and February 2009, when Ch´ avez won a refe rendum for a constitutional amendment removing presidential term limits.14I focus on this period for the analysis because it is the only time period for which complete data on land refor m applicants and beneﬁciaries are available.15The land reform program is popular throughout the country’s 334 municipalit ies and 14Of the set of land applicants, 22,548 were not registered voters in 2004 and the refore did not appear in Maisanta. 15Data on applicants is unavailable after February 2009, making it impossible to know whose land applications were denied. Furthermore, data on subsequent beneﬁc iaries does not indicate when an 15 capital district, with an average of 345 applicants per municipality. All but one municipality had applicants. The mostly plains states of Anzo´ ategui, Apure, Barinas, Bol´ ı var, and Gu´ arico along the Orinoco River all had a high number of applicants, as did Lara and Portugues a. The second part of the analysis examines whether there is a political b ias in the land grant pro- cess conditional on applying for land; it therefore focuses on who becom es abeneﬁciary . There are two principal ways in which bureaucrats can bias the grant process. F irst, they could simply refuse to grant land to opposition members, instead giving preference to appl icants who are known Ch´ avez supporters or appear ideologically swing. Second, bureaucrats could pref erence the applications of petition non-signers by expediting the process of fulﬁlling an app lication relative to that of an oppo- sition applicant, thus introducing a “bureaucratic delay” in opposi tion applications or “bureaucratic haste” in pro-Ch´ avez applications. I test both of these possible mechanisms. The ﬁrst mechanism disti nguishes between the 6,000 beneﬁciaries that successfully received land grants during the p eriod and the remaining applicants that did not. I also examine which individuals have reached the legal r eview stage, one step from becoming a beneﬁciary. Whereas the reform was still in its early stage s at the beginning of 2009 and the number of beneﬁciaries was relatively small, over 21,000 individu als had reached legal review, and these applicants represented the most likely next round of beneﬁc iaries. The second mechanism takes into closer account the timing of land grant applications to address the i ssue of right-censoring in the duration of the application process. Since INTi’s operations were c entralized in Caracas in 2007, the average application has spent 10.6 months in processing, with applic ations enduring anywhere between the full time span (April 2007-February 2009) and only one month, whic h are those that entered the system just prior to the constitutional referendum i n February 2009. This information allows the analysis to account for application time in the likelihood of becoming a beneﬁciary, and also enables an analysis of which applicants have remained in the earlie st stages of the application process for prolonged periods, having their applications eﬀective ly rejected. 5.2 Key Explanatory Variables: Support for Ch´ avez and Governor Part isanship The ﬁrst key explanatory variable in the analysis is whether or not an ind ividual is an opponent of former President Ch´ avez, which is measured as whether or not they e ither signed the third recall application was submitted, the type of land grant applied for, or when land was granted. 16 petition to hold a referendum on Ch´ avez’s tenure (Opposition), si gned a counter-petition to recall opposition politicians (Loyalist), or signed neither petition (Swing) . The availability of such data is unique in that it represents revealed political preferences r ather than stated preferences typically employed from surveys, and that it comes from the same database used in p art to actually target Ch´ avez opponents. As Hsieh et al. (2011) and Stokes et al. (2013) discuss, there is little evidence suggesting individuals were coerced into signing. These authors als o use petition signing to tap political preferences. Hsieh et al. (2011) plausibly argue that petition s igning was a signal of particularly strong partisanship.16Stokes et al. (2013, 291-94) refer to these measures as “ex-ante political ideology,” in that they represent the information set availab le to the government prior to its campaign against the recall referendum and as it was just beginning its misiones social programs.17 Furthermore, because the voting center ﬁxed eﬀects included in most models below yield comparisons of individual outcomes withina voting center, this eliminates concerns that individuals may ha ve signed strategically based on whether they live in a pro- or anti-Ch´ ave z state or municipality. Data on Ch´ avez support is available for the entire voting population in 2004. Out of a total of 12 million registered voters, over 3 million signed the third petit ion. Opposition is concentrated in the western states of M´ erida, T´ achira, and Zulia, and northern states such as Falc´ on and Yaracuy. As the theory indicates, however, the likelihood of receiving lan d is inﬂuenced not only by an individual’s political preferences but also by the political aﬃliat ion of relevant subnational politicians who govern in the district in which they reside. In the case of land reform, state governors serve as signals to the center about land allocation and can either facilitate or inh ibit the application and land distribution process. Consequently, it is more likely that p ro-Ch´ avez governors will be able to aid their political supporters than opposition governors. Because of the importance of state-level politicians in the reform program, the analyses include not only an indiv idual’s political preferences, but also interactions between these preferences and the political aﬃliation of the governor of the individual’s state. The aﬃliation of governors were coded according to whether they were members of Ch´ avez’s PSUV party or members of an opposition party. Because grants dur ing the period of 16See Hsieh et al. (2011) for a further discussion of why an individual would s ign such a petition. 17To the extent that partisan preferences varied between petition- signing and the time of applying for land, and that oﬃcials did not solely rely on petition information in inf erring partisanship, this should induce noise in the preferences measure and make uncoverin g a relationship more diﬃcult. 17 analysis were rewarded in a wave shortly before the 2009 referendum, p olitical aﬃliation is coded from the 2008 elections. 5.3 Control Variables The analyses include a set of additional variables that may aﬀect the lik elihood that an individual applies for or receives a land grant, which if omitted could confound the results. The ﬁrst control is age. Because one has to demonstrate that they will use any land received p roductively, individuals with more farming experience may be more likely to enter the program . Age may also be related to ideology. The second control is whether an individual is a participan t in one of a set of the government’s other social programs – Misi´ on Ribas, Vuelvan Caras, or othe r programs. Misi´ on Ribas aids poor adults in studying for a high school degree, Misi´ on Vuelvan C aras is aimed at creating jobs through the promotion of cooperatives, and a series of other programs provid e low-cost health care and food, teach literacy, and provide citizens with identiﬁcation cards. If an individual is involved in one of these government programs, they may be more likely to apply for and receive grants from the landreformagency. Ontheonehand, receivingbeneﬁtslikelycorrel ateswithincome, soparticipation in other social programs may proxy for this, even if imperfectly. Mor e directly, participants in other social programs may have more information about other social programs or have gr eater knowledge about how to navigate the bureaucracy in order to successfully apply f or beneﬁts.18 The third control variable is the log of the rural population, measured at t he municipal level with data from the National Statistics Institute (INE). This variable captur es the potential demand for land reform, which is higher in more rural areas. A fourth control is the p overty rate, since poverty may drive both political preferences and the probability of applying for or receiving a land grant. Thisvariable, againmeasuredatthemunicipallevelwithdatafromtheI NE,indicatesthepercentage of households that lack basic necessities. Lastly, the ﬁrst part of the an alysis includes a control for the percentage of overall pro-Ch´ avez vote in 2004 in a given voting center (those who voted “No” to recalling Ch´ avez), since this may inﬂuence voter targeting and the administration of government programs. These last three controls drop from the analyses when individ uals are compared within 18Because Maisanta captures Misi´ on participation several years prior to the 2007-9 land grant data, this variable may suﬀer measurement error. An instrumental variable s analysis below helps address concerns that this error may be correlated with both political prefer ences and receiving beneﬁts. 18 voting centers, since the inclusion of voting center ﬁxed eﬀects implicitly controls for factors that do not vary within voting centers. Anothersetofcontrolsforthetypeofgrantappliedforisincludedinthe analysisofthelandgrant process conditional on application. Applicants apply for one of four types of grants: adjudications, cartas agrarias , declarations of permanence, and simple property registrations. An adju dication grants the legal right to work and exploit a parcel of land. A property regist ration veriﬁes an owner’s full legal possession of a property and enters it into the national land re gistry. A carta agraria grants temporary usufruct rights over an occupied plot of land until le gal disputes over ownership are settled. A declaration of permanence allows an applicant to remain on an d continue occupying a plot of land over which they hold no title absent a separate proceedin g that must pass through INTi. These grant types are not substitutes; individuals apply for diﬀere nt grants depending on their de facto and de jure landholding status. Existing landowners would appl y for property registration, whereas new squatters apply for a carta agraria or permanency rights (depending on the ownership of the land they occupy) and farmers with informal rights apply for an adju dication. Given INTi’s mandate to advance land distribution along with strict new requireme nts to prove formal property rights, I expect that applications for a carta agraria or permanency rights are more likely to succeed than other applications, and property registrations are least likely to s ucceed. A ﬁnal control included in the analysis of land grants is the time in month s elapsed since an applicant delivered their application to the local INTi oﬃce and were r egistered in the centralized national land reform database as of February 2009. Earlier applicants are more like ly to have had their claim investigated and processed than those that applied shortl y before the 2009 referendum. A full set of descriptive statistics is found in the Appendix. Regar ding the pool of registered voters,ofarandomsampleof200,000registeredvotersfromMaisantaabout26%ofind ividualssigned the petition to recall Ch´ avez and 11% signed the counter-petition to r ecall opposition politicians; just under 1% of registered voters in the sample applied to INTi for a lan d grant.19As a whole, INTi land applicants were more likely than average citizens to participate inmisiones programs and more 19A random sample is used for the application stage only given the unwieldy c omputational re- quirements of the full database. The applicant sample is also represe ntative of applicants in the areas most subject to reform. Municipal-level rates of the sample applican ts and the full set of applicants are correlated at over 95%. Demographics and misiones participation were also highly correlated. 19 likely to come from rural areas with smaller voting centers. They wer e also somewhat less likely to be Ch´ avez opponents, with only 21% having signed the recall petition, and slightly more likely to be ardent Ch´ avez supporters, with just over 12% signing the counter-p etition. Fromthepoolofall145,000landapplications(i.e., notjustthesubsetfromt heMaisantasample), 5% received grants during this period, representing 7,327 applicati ons from 6,000 individuals. Nearly 15% of applications, a total of 21,472, reached the legal review stage. The most common instrument applicants petitioned INTi for was a usufruct certiﬁcate ( carta agraria ). 5.4 Controlling for Unobserved Heterogeneity Because there is geographical variation in political preferences, and in dividuals that apply for and receive beneﬁts may also be strong Ch´ avez supporters for unobserv ed reasons, most models compare individuals within voting centers ( centros) using a conditional (ﬁxed eﬀects) logit speciﬁcation to control for unobserved local heterogeneity that may aﬀect both of these f actors. Implicitly including voting center ﬁxed eﬀects in this manner addresses the possibili ty that an individual-level omitted variable not available in Maisanta (or captured by the controls) such as in come may be driving both political preferences and the likelihood of applying for and receiv ing a grant. While the variable for participation in other social programs may proxy for income to some degree , beneﬁts administered through these programs may also be politicized. Because unobserved in dividual factors such as income are fairly homogenous within a voting center, it is possible to i dentify the role of political preferences in land applications and grants. The very small size of voting centers within Venezuela largely accou nts for their “homogenous socioeconomic composition” (Lander and L´ opez Maya 2005, 47). There were a total of nearly 8,600 voting centers for the 2004 recall referendum and an average of 1,400 voters pe r voting center. The average voting center among land applicants had about 2,000 individuals. The unit of the voting centeristhereforemuchsmallerthanamunicipalityorevenaparis h, andtypicallyconsistsofacouple city blocks, part of a small town, or a short stretch of valley (see the Appendix for examples). Voting centers are often placed in schools or other public buildings in the n eighborhood close to a voter’s residence (Wells 1980, 38). In sum, the ability to compare individuals w ithin voting centers enables a very ﬁne-grained analysis that can more eﬀectively distinguish bet ween programmatic policies that target sectors of the population and non-programmatic distributive strate gies that target individuals. 20 6 Empirical Analysis There are ﬁve main parts to the analysis. I ﬁrst explore the relationsh ip between petition signing and the likelihood of applying for land using a series of logit analyses t o determine who applies for land. Second, I restrict the focus to land applicants and analyze the l ikelihood an applicant receives a land grant conditional on applying to the program. Third, because the land reform program is ongoing and many applications have not reached ﬁnal approval or denial, I condu ct an analysis on the likelihood of receiving land that takes into account the censore d nature of the data. This analysis is also expanded to examine which applicants have reached the legal re view stage, which is only one step short of becoming a beneﬁciary but counts three times as many ind ividuals as beneﬁciaries. Fourth, I examine the possibility of endogeneity bias in receiving l and grants, for instance due to the omission of variables that are linked to both expressed political pr eferences and the likelihood of receiving a land grant (whether due to the propensity to apply or othe rwise). Lastly, given that many applications have disproportionately languished in the earliest stages of the process for prolonged periods, I analyze what makes some applicants more likely to have thei r applications eﬀectively rejected rather than progress. 6.1 Barriers to Application: Who Applies for Land Grants Are Ch´ avez supporters more likely to apply for land grants with the exp ectation that their political support will yield them material beneﬁts? Table 2 explores this qu estion in a series of logit models using whether or not an individual applied for a land grant as the depende nt variable. The results for the application stage only are based on 200,000 randomly chosen registered vote rs from Maisanta given the massive size of the overall database. Several of the speciﬁcat ions are voting center ﬁxed eﬀects logit models to allow the incidence of land applications to vary by locality for unobserved reasons such as income or land productivity. The standard errors are clu stered by voting center to address any arbitrary correlation among observations at this level. Models 1-3 of Table 2 present the aggregate results of a set of logit models t hat do not compare individuals within voting centers. Model 1 serves as a baseline, to which the political variables are added in Model 2. Age is positive and statistically signiﬁcant across Tab le 2 as is log(Rural Population), indicating that older voters from more sparsely populated r ural areas are more likely to apply for land. Misiones, which captures participation in other major go vernment social programs, 21 is positively associated with applying for land. Higher poverty rates are also positively linked to land applications, as is support for Ch´ avez as measured by the voting cen ter vote share not to recall him in the 2004 referendum. Model 2 adds variables for whether an indiv idual signed the petition to recall Ch´ avez (Opposition) or a counter-petition to recall opposit ion politicians (Loyalist). These signers can be considered, respectively, strong Ch´ avez opponents and strong supporters. Model 2 indicates that relative to non-signers (swing), pro-Ch´ avez loyalis ts (labelled “patriots” in Maisanta) were more likely to apply for land. Ch´ avez opponents, on the other hand, were not statistically distinguishably less likely to apply for land than petition non-signe rs. Model 3 splits the eﬀect of support for Ch´ avez on applying by the part isan aﬃliation of the state governor. Whether an individual signed either the recall petition or counter-petition is interacted with dummy variables for the governor’s partisan aﬃliation to determin e whether the likelihood of applyingwasconditionalonthepoliticalaﬃnityofthegovernor. Thebasel inecategoryofcomparison for the political variables is now an individual in an opposition state who signed neither petition. The results suggest that land applicants are more likely to be petition non-signers in states with pro- Ch´ avez governors or Ch´ avez supporters in opposition regions. It is poss ible that the PSUV works harder to mobilize Ch´ avez supporters in opposition regions to build a strong challenge to incumbent governors, and part of this strategy includes the promotion of distribut ive programs. Because the results in Models 1-3 may be driven by some omitted vari able that is correlated with political preferences and inﬂuences the likelihood of receivin g land, Models 4-6 compare individuals within voting centers to control for unobserved heterogeneity. The coeﬃcients for variables ﬁxed by voting center are therefore no longer estimated. Furthermore, indi viduals in voting centers that do not vary in the outcome variable (applying for land) are also dropped, whic h reduces the number of observations in these models relative to Models 1-3. As in Models 1-3, Age and Misiones remain positively linked to applications. Similarly to Model 2, the Model 5 coeﬃcient for pro-Ch´ avez individuals is again positive and signiﬁcant. Using the Model 5 coeﬃci ents with the observation- speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀect set to zero and other covariates set at their mean s, the probability of loyalists in a given voting center applying for land is 10% higher than the baseline predicted probability for petition non-signers. Strong Ch´ avez opponents, by contrast, are not st atistically signiﬁcantly more likely to apply than petition non-signers. Model 6 again interacts an individual’s political preferences with t he partisan aﬃliation of their 22 governor. Because there is no variance in a governor’s political aﬃliati on within voting centers, the baseline category of comparison is now simply petition non-signers with in a given voting center, where the governor’s partisan aﬃliation corresponds to the state where the voting center is located. For example, the coeﬃcients on pro-Ch´ avez and opposition individuals in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors can be interpreted relative to petition non-signers with in a given voting center, when the voting center resides in a state with a pro-Ch´ avez governor. The “Ch ´ avez Governor Baseline” is therefore not estimated. As in Model 3, the pro-Ch´ avez eﬀect found in Model 6 operates primarily in states with opposition governors. How an individual signed the petit ion had no measureable impact on applying for land in states with pro-Ch´ avez PSUV governors. In sum, the Table 2 results indicate that pro-Ch´ avez individuals ar e somewhat more likely to be land applicants. The partisanship of governors has partial inﬂuence on th is: loyalists apply more than others in opposition regions. This is the only discernible partis an application trend that holds in the full model. The next three sections examine if governors are more important in delivering beneﬁts than in inﬂuencing applications. 6.2 Land Reform Recipients: Who Receives Land Grants Conditionalonapplyingforland, whichindividualsactuallyreceivea landgrant? Tables3-6useaset of logit models with whether or not an individual received a land grant as t he dependent variable. Given the Table 2 ﬁndings that strong Ch´ avez supporters are somewhat m ore likely to apply for land on average, I also ran a series of Heckman selection models on the sampl e of 200,000 individuals to address potential non-random selection into the land applicant pool. These models consistently reported a statistically insigniﬁcant inverse Mills’ ratio; furth ermore, likelihood ratio tests failed to reject the hypothesis that an independent selection equation was ne eded. As an alternative approach to concerns about selection, I also present below a series of instru mental variables (IV) regressions in Table 5. By capturing exogenous variation in expressed political prefer ences, the IV regressions help to ameliorate the possibility that omitted variable bias correlated wit h political preferences, such as characteristics linked to the propensity to apply for land, is driv ing the ﬁndings for land beneﬁciaries. Finally, that Table 2 indicates that strong Ch´ avez supporters are some what more likely to apply for land in certain areas on average suggests that the land applicant data are, if an ything, biased against ﬁnding an eﬀect for a core voter targeting strategy. Strong Ch´ avez supp orters may apply with weak 23 credentials hoping their partisan aﬃliation will suﬃce for receivin g a grant. The models in Tables 3-6 employ data on the full set of all land grant appli cants during the period April 2007-February 2009. As in Table 2, a series of models using aggregate data are pr esented, followed by models that compare individuals within voting centers . The Table 3 models include interactions between an individual’s political preferences and th e party aﬃliation of the incumbent governor of their state, as well as covariates. Age, participation in the misiones programs, and rural population are not stron gly linked with an increased likelihood of receiving a grant, although the former two ar e generally positive and reach signiﬁcance in some models. The poverty rate, however, is positiv e and statistically signiﬁcant across models, indicating that land is granted at higher rates in poorer areas. M odels 2 adds a variable for when an application was submitted and therefore how long it has been u nder review. Model 3 also adds terms for the type of grant application. The baseline category of c omparison for the political variables in Models 1-3 are petition non-signers in opposition states. Models 1-3 indicate that individuals that signed the petition to recall Ch´ avez and that li ve in states with opposition governors are less likely to receive land grants conditional on applying. Model 1 suggests, by contrast, that pro-Ch´ avez petition signers in states with pro-Ch´ avez governor s are more likely to be successful in their applications, although this eﬀect loses signiﬁcance in Model s 2 and 3. Pro-Ch´ avez signers in opposition-held states are less likely to receive beneﬁts in Mo del 1. In addition and as expected, individuals who applied to the program earlier are more likely to becom e beneﬁciaries. Finally, and as anticipated, cartas agrarias and declarations of permanence are more likely to result in successfu l applications relative to adjudications, and simple property registrat ions are less likely to be granted. Models 4-6 are speciﬁed similarly to Models 1-3 but now compare indi viduals within voting cen- ters to control for unobserved heterogeneity. As in Table 2, the baselin e categories of comparison in these models are petition non-signers within a given voting cent er, where the governor’s partisan aﬃliation corresponds to the state where the voting center is located . Similarly to Table 2 Models 4-6, individuals in voting centers that lack variance in the dependen t variable of receiving land are of necessity dropped, reducing the number of observations. Voting c enters with no land beneﬁcia- ries were slightly less rural and had slightly lower rates of poverty than those with at least some beneﬁciaries.20 20The results in Models 1-3 are similar when dropping voting centers with no land beneﬁciaries to 24 Individuals in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors that signed the pet ition to recall opposition oﬃcials were more likely to have successful applications than petit ion non-signers by an estimated 40% in Model 4. By contrast, pro-Ch´ avez individuals in opposition-held states were signiﬁcantly less likely to be granted land than petition non-signers in opposition- held states by an estimated 32%. These results are robust across Models 4-6. As in Models 1-3, Ch´ avez op ponents in states with opposition governors were less likely to receive land. The odds of a s uccessful application for these individuals is an average estimated 18% less than than petition non-signe rs. In terms of predicted probabilities, using the Model 4 coeﬃcients with the observation -speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀect set to zero and other covariates set at their means, the probability of receiving land for pro-Ch´ avez individuals in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors is an estimated 8.2% higher than the bas eline predicted probability within voting centers where at least one individual received land. The probability is an estimated 8% lower for pro-Ch´ avez individuals in opposition-held states and 3.3% lo wer for opposition individuals in opposition-held states. Insum, Table3indicatesthatCh´ avezopponentsthatvoteinstateshel dbyanti-Ch´ avezgovernors are signiﬁcantly less likely to receive land, suggesting that the opp osition is being denied land reform beneﬁts. Furthermore, pro-Ch´ avez individuals in states with PS UV governors are signiﬁcantly more likelytoreceiveland, anindicationofacorevotertargetingstrategy. Pro-Ch´ avezindividualsinstates with opposition governors, by contrast, are less likely to receive lan d. The ﬁndings demonstrate the importance of political linkages between state and national oﬃcials in bene ﬁt distribution.21 6.2.1 The Lesser Role of Mayors in Land Grants Mayors have considerably less inﬂuence over grant distribution th an governors; a ﬁnding that their political aﬃliation is less relevant for who receives land than that of gov ernors would therefore help serve as a “placebo test” supporting the theory. While mayors can, si milarly to governors, publicize the land reform program positively or negatively to constituents and ser ve as an informational signal mimic the sample in Models 4-6, suggesting that the Model 4-6 results are not driven by having to drop voting centers with no variation in land grants given the within-e stimation. 21A series of further analyses suggests that distributive beneﬁts are aimed at persuading abstainers to vote rather than rewarding loyal activists or cronies, most likely d ue to the importance of voter turnout in a polarized environment with few swing voters and variable turnout (see Appendix). 25 aboutthetypesofindividualsintheirdistricts, theydonotcontr olthestatepoliceunitsinruralareas thatcanbeusedtodeterlandinvasions, andthelowervisibilityand fewerresourcesofmayorsrelative to their state counterparts yields them less inﬂuence in collaborat ing with INTi and coordinating meetings with institutions that work with INTi to ﬁnance reform bene ﬁciaries. Whereas governors strengthened the administrative infrastructure of their state gov ernments and build independent political bases immediately upon the ﬁrst regional elections in 1989, muni cipal initiatives were slower and more uneven (de la Cruz 2004, 199-200). Furthermore, recent programs such as Plan Bol´ ıvar and the creation of consejos comunales have undermined municipalities by mobilizing elements of the military and civil society groups to provide public services typically provided by municipalities. The regional land reform oﬃces, located in state capitals where governors operate, are therefore more likely to be inﬂuenced by the governor than by one or several of the many mayors in a state. To test these observations more systematically, I ran a series of mode ls that examined the role of both mayors and governors in the likelihood that an individual receiv es a land grant. As with Models 4-6ofTable3,thesemodelscomparedindividualswithinvotingcente rs. Ifmayoralpoliticalaﬃliation is less important than that for governors, we should observe that the coe ﬃcients for individuals of a particular political aﬃliation (e.g., loyalists) and with a ﬁxed govern or political aﬃliation (e.g., pro- Ch´ avez) are statistically indistinguishable across various mayoral political aﬃliations . Furthermore, the coeﬃcients by individual/governor political aﬃliation should be s imilar in direction to the Table 3 coeﬃcients regardless of the political aﬃliation of an individual’s ma yor. The results, reported in the Appendix, largely bear out these expec tations, serving as a successful placebo test for the theory. These models fail to reject the null h ypothesis that the coeﬃcients on loyalists in pro-Ch´ avez versus opposition municipalities within states with pro-Ch´ avez governors are statistically diﬀerent, that the coeﬃcients on loyalists in pro-C h´ avez versus opposition municipalities within opposition states are statistically diﬀerent, and that the coe ﬃcients on opposition individuals in pro-Ch´ avez versus opposition municipalities within opposition s tates are statistically diﬀerent. Only the coeﬃcients on opposition individuals in pro-Ch´ avez versu s opposition municipalities within states with pro-Ch´ avez governors are statistically distinguishable . However, and consistent with Table 3, neither of these coeﬃcients is distinguishable from zero. F urthermore, the coeﬃcients from these models are also largely similar in direction and magnitude to the Table 3 coeﬃcients.22 22Results are similar if we consider bureaucratic delay, as in the sec tion below. 26 6.3 Bureaucratic Delay: Whose Applications are Expedited or Delayed Beneﬁciaries only constituted 5% of applicants in early 2009 because the c entralized administration of the land program was still in its relatively early phases. INTi was stil l processing the majority of applications. Consequently, many applicants could become future be neﬁciaries, so that treating them as non-beneﬁciaries may bias inferences. Fortunately, the app licant data distinguish between linear stages in the application process, from the entrance of an applicat ion into the system through veriﬁcation of its validity, property inspection, legal processing, and ﬁnal grant approval. The data also contain information on how long an application has been with INTi, provi ding a good indication of how land applicants are moving through the process. Application proc essing itself may be inﬂu- enced by political considerations: because of the important role of INTi f unctionaries in the grant process, a particular application may be delayed or expedited for pol itical reasons. This section treats these issues in two ways. First, it accounts for right-cens ored data in the application process. Second, it provides an analysis of the determinants of entering the l egal processing stage, of which there are many more than beneﬁciaries. Figure 1 displays the proportion of land applications in each stage of the pr ocess over time. For each applicant, there is information about their current application st age as well as how long INTi has held their application. The ﬁgure displays three interesting program trends. First, a number of applications have languished in the early stages of the process, and thi s is particularly true of earlier applicants. Although there were fewer applicants in the ﬁrst half of 2007, m any of their applications have not advanced. At the same time, applicants who have been in the s ystem longer are more likely to receive grants. Second, time until property inspection has decreased nearly monotonically, suggesting that the program is increasing in intensity. Finally, the re are important shifts in appli- cation processing just prior to the two national referendums on const itutional amendments to allow indeﬁnite presidential re-election. Individuals who applied f or land in the leadup to the 2007 vote are much more likely to have had their desired property inspected by INTi than earlier applicants. Individuals who applied for land only a few months before the 2009 refere ndum are more likely to have had their applications expedited through the legal review stage ju st prior to approval. Because the majority of land applications remain in the bureaucratic pr ocess, and may either be processed successfully or denied, these observations are right-c ensored. A logit model of whether or not an applicant has received land does not account for the fact that many land applications are still 27 being processed and may result in grants. One way to address this i ssue is to use conditional (ﬁxed eﬀects) logit models that group individuals not only by voting center b ut also by risk sets, which in this case are the time in years of application for land.23This approach is analogous to survival analysis with shared frailty between individuals of the same voting c enter (Box-Steﬀensmeier and Jones 2004). I use this approach to analyze both beneﬁciaries as well as which individuals have had their applications advance to the legal review stage, which is only one st ep removed from becoming a beneﬁciary. Although these applications have not been fulﬁlled, th ey represent the most likely next round of beneﬁciaries. This analysis has the additional advantage that whereas the proportion of beneﬁciaries is relatively small (5%), the rate of reaching the legal review stage is considerably higher at 15% of applicants. Table 4 presents the results of the models that adjust for the time an individual has been in the application process. Models 1 and 2 indicate very similar results t o Models 5 and 6 of Table 3 both substantively and statistically. The negative sign on the Model 1 and 2 coeﬃcients for individuals who signed the recall petition and vote in opposition strongholds signiﬁe s that even when taking into account the INTi processing time of applications for these individual s, they have a reduced likelihood of becoming a beneﬁciary relative to petition non-signers in oppositi on-held states. As in Table 3, Ch´ avez supporters in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors are more like ly to receive land grants than non-signers in pro-Ch´ avez states, whereas Ch´ avez supporters in st ates with opposition governors are less likely to become beneﬁciaries. The dependent variable in Models 3 and 4 is whether or not an application has reached the legal review stage. While this is not a ﬁnal decision on an individual’s appli cation – the central INTi oﬃce in Caracas must still approve the reviewed application – it is one s tep short of becoming a beneﬁciary. Nearly 21,500 applications have reached this stage, suggesting that the reform process is moving forward. The results for the political variables in Models 3-4 are largely similar to those in Models 1-2. Ch´ avez supporters in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors ar e more likely to reach the legal review stage than petition non-signers in pro-Ch´ avez states. Ch´ avez supporters in opposition-held states, by contrast, are less likely to reach this stage than non-signer s in those states. Individuals that signed the recall petition and vote in opposition strongholds have a redu ced likelihood of reaching 23Grouping individuals by application month reduces the sample size b y over 90%, introducing concerns with sample selection bias. 28 the legal review stage. Although the coeﬃcient is just short of statisti cal signiﬁcance in Model 3 (p=0.13), it is negative and signiﬁcant in Model 4, indicating that these individuals are less likely to reach legal review. In contrast to Models 1-2, however, opposition in dividuals in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors are more likely to reach legal review. Furtherm ore, the magnitude of the coeﬃcients on the political variables are somewhat attenuated in Model s 3-4 relative to Models 1-2. These diﬀerences highlight the importance of the ﬁnal centralized d ecisions on applications by INTi. 6.4 Robustness to Endogeneity Is it possible that the estimates in Tables 3-4 suﬀer from endogeneity bias? Although receiving land cannot aﬀect political preferences as recorded in Maisanta since the r ecall petition was signed before the land reform law was amended in 2005, it is possible there could be endoge neity if individuals who are good candidates for land reform were more likely to sign the petition supporting Ch´ avez. There may also be omitted variable bias if some individual, within-voting c enter factor such as profession or insertion into social networks impacts both political preference s and the likelihood of receiving a land grant in a systematic way not captured by the controls included. I n a similar fashion, there may also be measurement error that biases the results. Misiones, for ins tance, may imperfectly proxy for income, and the “noise” may be correlated with both political preferen ces and receiving land. To address these concerns, I turn to an instrumental variable (IV) approac h designed to capture the exogenous variation in political preferences. A valid instrumental variable must satisfy the exclusion restrict ion: the instrument must be correlated with the dependent variable in the ﬁrst stage regressions , whether an individual is a loyalist or whether an individual is an opposition member, but not corre lated with the error term of a second stage regression, where receiving land is the dependent var iable. Because individuals could sign a petition in support of Ch´ avez to recall opposition politicians, s ign a separate petition against Ch´ avez, or sign neither petition, we must identify instruments for both loyalists and opposition individuals and estimate two ﬁrst-stage regressions across the IV mod els. One potential candidate for an instrument for whether an individual si gned to recall opposition oﬃcials is the number of registered voters at their voting center. Large r voting centers are more politically important, and thus the PSUV is likely to dedicate more re sources to mobilization eﬀorts such as petition drives via its organization Comando Maisanta . Yet given the central organization 29 of INTi and large numbers of land applicants from across the country, voting c enter size is unlikely to have any direct impact on actually receiving beneﬁts. Because th e eﬀects of voting center size on signing a petition for Ch´ avez are likely to decline at higher levels , voting center size is logged. To capture the exogenous variation in whether an individual signed the p etition to recall Ch´ avez, Iusethenumberofforeigncitizenswithintheirvotingcenter. O ppositionindividualsarelesslikelyto be immediately close to foreigners because they are less likely to l ive close to government installations and foreign interests (e.g. consulates, embassies, businesses). G overnment and foreign installations such as consulates are less likely to locate in neighborhoods where r esidents strongly oppose Ch´ avez. Furthermore, those who work in these installations and may therefore want to live close by are less likely to be strong Ch´ avez opponents (Jatar 2006). Finally, given the haras sment of selected foreign ﬁrms that are more likely to employ opposition members, the remainin g more successful companies (e.g., those that collaborate with PDVSA) are more likely to be located in ar eas with higher support for Ch´ avez. At the same time, given how land is granted to individuals , there is no obvious reason why being registered at a voting center with fewer foreigners shoul d directly reduce the likelihood of receiving land. As with voting center size, I log the measure of fore igner presence. Although the exclusion restriction is fundamentally untestable, that the log nu mber of registered voters and the log number of foreigners are statistically insigniﬁcant when estimating a regression model for receiving land provides some limited evidence that these instruments pass the exclusion restriction from an empirical perspective (for a similar approach, see, e.g., Eichengre en and Leblang 2008). Table 5 presents the second-stage IV results. Model 1 is speciﬁed similarly to Model 1 of Table 3, where voting center ﬁxed eﬀects are not included and the depende nt variable is whether or not an individual receives a land grant. The ﬁrst-stage instruments are t he log number of registered voters at an individual’s voting center in the equation predicting s upport for Ch´ avez and the log number of foreigners in an individual’s voting center in the equation predicting opposition.24The results conform to theoretical expectations: voting center size is strongly positively associated with whether an individual is a loyalist, and foreigner presence is stron gly negatively linked to whether an individual is an opposition member. The predicted values from the ﬁr st stage regressions are used for Loyalist and Opposition in the second-stage regression displayed in Model 1. 24F-tests on the instruments in the ﬁrst stage regressions consisten tly pass the commonly used threshold separating strong from weak instruments. 30 The results for the political variables are consistent with the Table 3 results. Ch´ avez opponents in states held by anti-Ch´ avez governors are signiﬁcantly less likely t han non-signers to receive land, as are pro-Ch´ avez individuals in states with opposition governors. By con trast, pro-Ch´ avez individuals in states with PSUV governors are signiﬁcantly more likely to receive land. Petition non-signers in states with PSUV governors, as captured by the Ch´ avez Governor Baseli ne, are less likely to receive land than non-signers in opposition states. The magnitude of the coeﬃcie nts on these variables also increase substantially over those in Model 1 of Table 3, suggesting that the true eﬀect of political preferences on receiving land grants is higher than that estimated in Table 3. The probability of pro-Ch´ avez individuals in states with PSUV governors receiving lan d is increased by 22% over the baseline, whereas that for pro-Ch´ avez and opposition individuals in st ates with opposition governors is reduced by an estimated 20% and 16%, respectively. Model 2 of Table 5, w hich introduces controls for the time in application and type of grant applied for as in Model 3 of Table 3, yields similar results to Model 1, although the coeﬃcient for pro-Ch´ avez individuals in oppos ition states is now positive. Models 3-4 of Table 5 present the second-stage results of a set of condit ional ﬁxed eﬀects logit models that, as in Table 4, group individuals both by voting center and th e length of time they have been in the application process. Because these models implicitl y control for factors that do not vary within voting centers or application times, the variables for povert y, rural population, and time in application drop from the ﬁrst and second stage regressions. For the same re ason, the ﬁrst stage regressions must be run without voting center ﬁxed eﬀects to esti mate the instruments. Model 3 is speciﬁed similarly to Model 2 of Table 4, with receiving a land gran t as the dependent variable, and Model 4 is speciﬁed similarly to Model 4 of Table 4, where the dep endent variable is reaching the legal review stage. The results are consistent with both the Table 4 results and the IV results in Models 1-2 of Table 5, and the political variables are again higher in magnitu de and statistical signiﬁcance. 6.5 Whose Applications are Eﬀectively Denied Whereas Tables 3-5 analyze the determinants of successfully receiv ing a land grant or reaching the legal review stage, what determines whether an applicant is outrigh t rejected by INTi? If Ch´ avez supporters in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors are more like ly to receive grants, then their applications should also be less likely to be rejected. Anti-Ch´ ave z petition signers in states with 31 oppositiongovernorsshouldmoreoftenhavetheirlandapplicationsreje cted. Unfortunately, thedata usedheredonotindicateoutrightrejectionofanapplication. However, Figure1isstronglysuggestive of diﬀerential outcomes in the application process. A number of applic ations have languished in the early stages of the process, particularly among earlier applicants. Many of these applicants have not even had property inspections, indicating that INTi is still revis ing the applicant’s basic information. One could consider that applicants who remain in the “open” or “veriﬁcati on” stage despite having applied before the December 2007 referendum have had their applicati ons eﬀectively rejected. Table 6 analyzes applicants that have been in INTi’s system for more than 15 months.25The dependent variable is coded “1” for those individuals whose application is in the “open” or “veriﬁ- cation” stage, and “0” for those who have passed beyond this stage. The resul ts are presented ﬁrst without and then with voting center ﬁxed eﬀects. Individuals are n ot grouped by time of application because the analysis is already restricted to those with applications open more than 15 months.26 Model 1 includes the variables for both pro- and anti-Ch´ avez petition signers. Applicants that have long failed to advance beyond the early stages are signiﬁcantly less like ly to be Ch´ avez supporters and more likely to be Ch´ avez opponents. Models 2 and 3 consider the inte raction between the political aﬃliation of individuals and their state governors. Whereas Tables 3-5 in dicate that Ch´ avez support- ers in states with pro-Ch´ avez governors are more likely to receive gr ants, Table 6 indicates that these individuals are signiﬁcantly less likely to have their application s eﬀectively rejected. By contrast, Ch´ avez opponents in states with opposition governors are more likely to be eﬀectively rejected, as are pro-Ch´ avez individuals in these states. As expected, the coeﬃ cient for time in application is negative: individuals are more likely to have passed from these phase s the longer their application has been under review. The results in Models 4-6, which introduc e voting center ﬁxed eﬀects to control for unobserved local heterogeneity, are largely similar to those in Models 1-3. In sum, Table 6 further conﬁrms the ﬁndings in Tables 3-5. The Table 6 ﬁndings notwithstanding, there are still many loyalists w ho will ultimately be denied due to the large number of applicants and overwhelming demand for land. Other ﬁndings from the literature (e.g., Penfold 2007), as well as the positive coeﬃcients for M isiones in the Table 2 models, suggeststhatmanyoftheseloyalistsarelikelyrewardedthroughothers ocialprograms. Furthermore, 25Results are similar when adjusting this temporal cutoﬀ, for example t o 12 months. 26Results are similar when individuals are also further grouped by tim e of application. 32 the government may gain some political leverage over these loyalists w hile their applications are in the system, as occurred in Mexico’s land reform program (see, e.g., Alb ertus et al. 2015). 7 Scope Conditions: Distributive Politics inFederal Electoral Regime s The theory elaborated here could be applied to a host of cases beyond Vene zuela. Federal states represent a clear lower bound for the theory’s applicability, though it may also apply where the center’s costs of executing a national-level program across geographically disparate locales are pro- hibitively steep and where gains in targeting accuracy due to local kn owledge are suﬃciently high. This section brieﬂy presents comparative data on federal states wher e subnational politicians both have the capacity to play a key role in distributive networks and act ually do so in non-programmatic, clientelistic ways. A recent data collection eﬀort by Kitschelt (2013) provides some of the b est quality cross-country indicators of clientelism, despite inherent measurement diﬃcu lties. The study covers 88 countries that had at least a modicum of open party competition in the ﬁve years prior to 2008 and at least two million inhabitants. Most relevant here is an aggregate index of clien telistic targeting eﬀort to attract voters and the businesses they work for by providing them wi th material inducements. The index runs from virtually no clientelistic targeting (a value of 5) t o minor (10), moderate (15), and extremely high (20) targeting eﬀorts. Table 7 displays the subset of countries from Kitschelt (2013) that hav e federal systems and which score above 10 on the clientelism index, which corresponds to countr ies where parties make at least a “minor eﬀort” to provide selective inducements. The level of cl ientelism in these countries is either “low,” which I classify as the set of countries that falls into the low er quartile of the index across all countries; “medium,” indicating countries between the lower qu artile and the moderate clientelistic targeting cutoﬀ; and “high,” indicating countries where clientelis tic targeting eﬀort is more than moderate. The eleven countries in Table 7 where clientelism is at medium or high levels are “most likely cases” of subnational politicians playing an important role in non -programmatic distributive networks. These are a particularly politically important set of states : they collectively hold a third of the world’s entire population. Table 7 also indicates whether these countries are closed dictatorsh ips, democracies, or hy- brid/competitive authoritarian regimes. Hybrid regimes and democraci es have greater electoral 33 incentives to pursue clientelistic programs, though democracies may also face greater distributive constraints on average. 8 Conclusion This paper contributes to our understanding of distributive polit ics by developing and testing a theoretical framework on the role of subnational politicians in mediating distributive relations be- tween voters and the central government. I argue that in distributiv e programs where intermediary incumbent politicians either directly deliver beneﬁts from th e center or indirectly signal how dis- tribution should occur, these subnational politicians become criti cal gatekeepers in facilitating or disrupting the center’s targeting of beneﬁts to constituents. S ubnational politicians’ eﬀects on net patterns of distribution depends on their partisanship and their de gree of autonomy in inﬂuencing the distribution of beneﬁts. Using a dataset on the universe of registered Venezuelan voters and a dat aset of all land grant applicants from April 2007-February 2009, I demonstrate in detail a case in whic h governors with limited autonomy impact the distribution of beneﬁts that the center targets to core constituents. Pro-Ch´ avez individuals in states with PSUV governors are signiﬁcantl y more likely to receive land than petition non-signers in these states. Pro-Ch´ avez and opposition i ndividuals in states with opposition governors, by contrast, are less likely to receive land, de monstrating the importance of political linkages between state and national oﬃcials in distributing r eform beneﬁts. Analyses that account for bureaucratic delay, eﬀectively rejected applications, and potential endogeneity support these ﬁndings. What emerges is the clearest picture to date of how pol itical bias operates in the government’s distributive targeting of Venezuela’s massive soci al programs, and the role subnational politicians play in ultimate targeting outcomes. The ﬁndings also underscore the care that needs to be taken in where an d how data are gathered forthepurposesoftestingtheoriesofdistributivepolitics. Whe nthebeneﬁtsofdistributiveprograms originate in government oﬃces and can be inﬂuenced by subnational politi cians – a concern salient even for some forms of broker-driven clientelism – sampling respond ents across districts to determine voter targeting strategies could yield inferences driven by compet ing targeting attempts at various levels of government rather than top-down targeting strategies. 34 9 References Albertus, Michael. 2013. “VoteBuyingwithMultipleDistributiveGo ods.”Comparative Political Studies46(9): 1082-1111. Albertus, Michael, Alberto Diaz-Cayeros, Beatriz Magaloni, and Barry We ingast. 2015. “Au- thoritarian Survival and Poverty Traps: Land Reform in Mexico.” Working paper. Auyero, Javier. 2001. Poor People’s Politics. Durham: Duke University Press. Bakke, Kristin, and Erik Wibbels. 2006. “Diversity, Disparity, and Ci vil Conﬂict in Federal States.” World Politics 59(1): 1-50. Banko, Catalina. 2009. “Redeﬁning Regional Policies in Venezuela.” In James S cott, ed., De- coding New Regionalism. Burlington, VT: Ashgate. Canache, Damarys. 2004. “Urban Poor and Political Order.” In Jennifer McCoy an d David Myers, eds., The Unraveling of Representative Democracy in Venezuela , pp. 33-49. Calvo, Ernesto, and Maria Murillo. 2013. “When Parties Meet Voters.” Comparative Political Studies46(7): 851-82. Chen, Jowei. 2013. “Voter Partisanship and the Eﬀect of Distributive Sp ending on Political Participation.” American Journal of Political Science 57(1): 200-17. Corrales, Javier, and Michael Penfold. 2011. Dragon in the Tropics: Hugo Ch´ avez and the Political Economy of Revolution in Venezuela. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. Cox, Gary. 2009. “Swing Voters, Core Voters and Distributive Politics.” In Ian Shapiro, ed., Political Representation , pp. 342-57. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Cox, Gary, and Mathew McCubbins. 1986. “Electoral Politics as a Redistrib utive Game.” Journal of Politics 48 (2): 370-89. Dahlberg, Matz, and Eva Johansson. 2002. “On the Vote-Purchasing Behavior of I ncumbent Governments.” American Political Science Review 96 (1): 27-40. de la Cruz, Rafael. 2004. “Decentralization.” In Jennifer McCoy and Davi d Myers, eds., The Unraveling of Representative Democracy in Venezuela , pp. 181-201. Delahaye, Olivier. 2006. “Reforma agraria y desarrollo rural sostenible en Venezuela.” Mimeo. Dixit, Avinash, andJohnLondregan. 1996. “TheDeterminantsoftheSuccessofS pecialInterests in Redistributive Politics.” Journal of Politics 58: 1132-55. Duque Corredor, Rom´ an. 2009. Procesos sobre la propiedad y la posesi´ on. Caracas: ACPS. 35 Finan, Frederico, and Laura Schechter. 2012. “Vote-Buying and Reciproci ty.”Econometrica 80(2): 863-81. Gans-Morse, Jordan, Sebastian Mazzuca, and Simeon Nichter. 2013. “Varieties of Clientelism: Machine Politics During Elections.” American Journal of Political Science , forthcoming. Gonzalez-Ocantos, Ezequiel, Chad Kiewiet de Jonge, Carlos Mel´ endez , Javier Osorio, and David Nickerson. 2012. “VoteBuyingandSocialDesirabilityBias: Experimental EvidencefromNicaragua.” American Journal of Political Science 56(1): 202-17. Hawkins, Kirk. 2010. Venezuela’s Chavismo and Populism in Comparative Perspective. New York: Cambridge University Press. Hawkins, Kirk, and David Hansen. 2006. “Dependent Civil Society: The C ´ ırculos Bolivarianos in Venezuela.” Latin American Research Review 41(1): 102-32. Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Edward Miguel, Daniel Ortega, and Francisco Rodr´ ıgue z. 2011. “The Price of Political Opposition: Evidence from Venezuela’s Maisanta .”American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(2): 196-214. Jatar, Ana Julia. 2006. Apartheid del siglo XXI: La inform´ atica al servicio de la discrimin aci´ on pol´ ıtica en Venezuela. Caracas: S´ umate. Kitschelt, Herbert. 2013. Dataset of the Democratic Accountability and Lin kages Project (DALP). Duke University. https://web.duke.edu/democracy/index. html. Lander, Luis, and Margarita L´ opez Maya. 2005. “Referendo Revocatorio Eleccion es Regionales en Venezuela.” Revista Venezolana de Econom´ ıa y Ciencias Sociales 11: 43-58. Nichter, Simeon. 2008. “Vote Buying or Turnout Buying? Machine Politics and the Secret Ballot.” American Political Science Review 102 (1): 19-31. Ortega, Daniel, and Michael Penfold. 2008. “Does Clientelism Work?” Unpub lished ms. Page, Tiﬀany. 2010. “Can the State Create Campesinos ? A Comparative Analysis of the Venezuelan and Cuban Repeasantization Programmes.” Journal of Agrarian Change 10(2): 251-72. Penfold, Michael. 2007. “ClientelismandSocialFunds: EvidencefromC h´ avez’sMisiones.” Latin American Politics and Society 49 (4): 69-84. Stokes, Susan. 2005. “Perverse Accountability: A formal model of machine pol itics with evidence from Argentina.” American Political Science Review 99: 315-25. Stokes, Susan. 2007. “Political Clientelism.” In Carles Boix and Susan Stok es, eds., Handbook 36 of Comparative Politics . Oxford University Press. Stokes, Susan, Thad Dunning, Marcelo Nazareno, and Valeria Brusco. 2013. Brokers, Voters, and Clientelism . New York: Cambridge University Press. Szwarcberg, Mariela. 2012. “Uncertainty, Political Clientelism, and Voter Turnout in Latin America: Why Parties Conduct Rallies in Argentina.” Comparative Politics 45(1): 88-106. Weitz-Shapiro, Rebecca. 2012. “What Wins Votes: Why Some Politicians Opt O ut of Clien- telism.” American Journal of Political Science 56(3): 568-83. Wells, Henry. 1980. “The Conduct of Venezuelan Elections: Rules and Pract ice.” InVenezuela at the Polls , ed. Howard Penniman. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Instit ute, pp. 30-55. 37 Table 1: Distributive Outcomes of Competing Center and Subnational Vot er Targeting Subnational Subnational Politician Partisanship Autonomy Opposition (Party B) Aligned (Party A) Full Party B core (Scenario 1) Party A core (Scenario 3) Limited Swing (Scenario 2) Party A core (Scenario 4) Notes: The table assumes that the central governing party (Party A) and subnational politician pursue core targeting strategies. Cells indicate observed distributive outcomes in subnational unit s. 38 Table 2: Who Applies? Logit Analyses of the Role of Political Preferences in Land Applications, 2007-2009 (Dependent Variable: INTi Land Applicant) Voting Center Fixed Eﬀects Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Age 0.003*** 0.003*** 0.003*** 0.002* 0.002** 0.002* (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) Misiones 0.396*** 0.372*** 0.342*** 0.189*** 0.145** 0.144** (0.065) (0.065) (0.065) (0.070) (0.070) (0.070) log(Rural Population) 0.152*** 0.153*** 0.101*** (0.014) (0.014) (0.015) Poverty Rate 0.039*** 0.040*** 0.041*** (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) Percent “No” in Recall 0.018*** 0.016*** 0.011*** (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) Loyalist 0.194** 0.429*** (0.076) (0.086) Opposition -0.095 -0.088 (0.059) (0.062) Loyalist in Ch´ avez State -0.324* -0.230 (0.174) (0.188) Loyalist in Opposition State 0.504*** 0.587*** (0.150) (0.161) Opposition in Ch´ avez State -0.103 -0.044 (0.141) (0.149) Opposition in Opposition State -0.008 -0.052 (0.126) (0.132) Ch´ avez Governor Baseline 0.724*** (0.085) Voting Center Fixed Eﬀects NO NO NO YES YES YES Observations 197871 197871 197871 46294 46294 46294 *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01 (two-tailed) Standard errors clustered by voting center. Results based on 200,000 rand omly chosen registered voters from Maisanta. Baseline for political variables is pet ition non-signers in Model 2 and petition non-signers in states with opposition governors in Model 3. Baseline for political variables in Model 5 is petition non-signers within a given voting ce nter. Baseline for political variables in Model 6 is petition non-signers within a given voting ce nter, where the governor’s partisan aﬃliation corresponds to the state where the voting center is located. 39 Table 3: Who Beneﬁts? Logit Analyses of the Role of Political Preferences an d Governors in Receiving Land Grants (Dependent Variable: Land Reform Beneﬁciary) Voting Center Fixed Eﬀects Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Age 0.003*** -0.003** 0.002 0.005*** 0.000 0.003** (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) Misiones -0.008 0.084 -0.008 0.063 0.088* 0.080 (0.058) (0.057) (0.057) (0.049) (0.053) (0.053) log(Rural Population) -0.003 0.002 0.004 (0.011) (0.012) (0.011) Poverty Rate 0.018*** 0.026*** 0.025*** (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) Loyalist in Ch´ avez State 0.696*** 0.024 -0.004 0.340** 0.339** 0.338** (0.131) (0.135) (0.137) (0.142) (0.166) (0.170) Loyalist in Opposition State -0.264** 0.095 0.020 -0.321** -0.382** -0.381** (0.111) (0.117) (0.121) (0.127) (0.151) (0.156) Opposition in Ch´ avez State 0.035 0.107 0.026 0.136 0.193 0.133 (0.087) (0.100) (0.099) (0.096) (0.121) (0.119) Opposition in Opposition State -0.059 -0.289*** -0.123 -0.145* -0.280*** -0.187* (0.072) (0.086) (0.085) (0.082) (0.108) (0.106) Ch´ avez Governor Baseline -0.583*** -0.626*** -0.652*** (0.069) (0.073) (0.074) Time in Application 0.402*** 0.478*** 0.396*** 0.432*** (0.005) (0.007) (0.006) (0.008) Carta Agraria 0.375*** 0.285*** (0.093) (0.092) Permanency Rights 0.380*** 0.463*** (0.096) (0.096) Title Registration -1.687*** -1.274*** (0.121) (0.135) Voting Center Fixed Eﬀects NO NO NO YES YES YES Observations 122196 122196 122196 62280 62280 62280 *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01 (two-tailed) Estimations conducted on full sample of land applicants. Standard errors clustered by voting center. Baselines for political variables in Models 1-3 are petition n on-signers in states with opposition governors. Baselines for political variables in Models 4-6 are petition non-signers within a given voting center, where the governors partisan aﬃliation corresponds to the stat e where the voting center is located. 40 Table 4: Who Beneﬁts? Logit Analyses of Political Preferences and Governors in Receiving Land Grant or Legal Review of Application Voting Center-Application Time Fixed Eﬀects DV: Land Beneﬁciary DV: Legal Review Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Age 0.001 0.003* 0.002*** 0.000 (0.002) (0.002) (0.001) (0.001) Misiones 0.101** 0.093* 0.025 0.029 (0.051) (0.051) (0.020) (0.020) Loyalist in Ch´ avez State 0.315** 0.323** 0.191*** 0.201*** (0.142) (0.145) (0.062) (0.062) Loyalist in Opposition State -0.325** -0.330** -0.203*** -0.210*** (0.128) (0.131) (0.055) (0.055) Opposition in Ch´ avez State 0.156 0.156 0.091** 0.110** (0.110) (0.110) (0.045) (0.045) Opposition in Opposition State -0.213** -0.184* -0.060 -0.084** (0.096) (0.097) (0.040) (0.041) Carta Agraria 0.406*** 0.009 (0.093) (0.044) Permanency Rights 0.755*** 0.161*** (0.097) (0.045) Title Registration -0.186 0.670*** (0.120) (0.045) Voting Center-Application Time YES YES YES YES Fixed Eﬀects Observations 33826 33826 204171 204171 *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01 (two-tailed) Estimations conducted on full sample of land applicants. Standard errors clustered by voting center. Baselines for political variables are pe tition non-signers who applied for land in the same time period within a give n voting center, where the governor’s political aﬃliation corresponds t o the state where the voting center is located. 41 Table 5: Who Beneﬁts? IV Estimates of Political Preferences and Gove rnors in Receiving Land Grant or Legal Review of Application Voting Center-Application Time Fixed Eﬀects DV: Land Beneﬁciary DV: Land Beneﬁciary DV: Legal Review Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Age 0.008** 0.002 0.033*** 0.006*** (0.004) (0.003) (0.006) (0.002) Misiones -0.268 -0.861*** -1.557*** -0.755*** (0.220) (0.196) (0.521) (0.190) log(Rural Population) 0.013 -0.045*** (0.019) (0.017) Poverty Rate 0.010 0.045*** (0.008) (0.007) Loyalist in Ch´ avez State 3.222*** 3.492*** 4.392** 5.591*** (1.094) (0.745) (1.841) (0.731) Loyalist in Opposition State -2.654** 2.768*** -6.726*** -1.584* (1.300) (0.899) (2.181) (0.821) Opposition in Ch´ avez State 1.552 1.365 2.641 4.953*** (1.055) (1.027) (1.633) (0.631) Opposition in Opposition State -4.278** -4.625*** -21.820*** -9.538*** (1.687) (1.574) (3.847) (1.401) Ch´ avez Governor Baseline -1.552*** -1.251*** (0.309) (0.314) Time in Application 0.443*** (0.012) Carta Agraria 0.369*** 0.164 -0.064 (0.103) (0.108) (0.047) Permanency Rights 0.168 0.261 -0.100 (0.117) (0.203) (0.077) Title Registration -1.142*** 0.430* 0.969*** (0.163) (0.232) (0.087) Stage 1 IV for Loyalist 0.068** 0.088*** 0.150*** 0.150*** (Log Number of Voters) (0.034) (0.033) (0.032) (0.032) Stage 1 IV for Opposition -0.052*** -0.054*** -0.028*** -0.028*** (Log Foreigners) (0.008) (0.008) (0.007) (0.007) Voting Center-Application Time NO NO YES YES Fixed Eﬀects Observations 122196 122196 33826 204171 *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01 (two-tailed) Estimations conducted on full sample of land applicants. Standard errors clustered by voting center. Baselines for political variables in Models 1-2 are petition non-signer s in states with opposition governors. Baselines for political variables in Models 3-4 are petition non-signers who applied for land in the same time period within a given voting center, where th e governor’s political aﬃliation corresponds to the state where the voting center is located. 42 Table 6: Who Beneﬁts? Logit Analyses of the Role of Political Preferences an d Governors in Application Failing to Advance Toward Beneﬁts (Dependent Variable: Application Still in Opening Stage After More Th an 15 Months) Voting Center Fixed Eﬀects Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Age 0.011*** 0.011*** 0.003* 0.013*** 0.013*** 0.005** (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) Misiones -0.212*** -0.246*** -0.174** -0.235*** -0.241*** -0.178** (0.063) (0.062) (0.071) (0.069) (0.069) (0.074) log(Rural Population) -0.019* 0.038*** 0.032** (0.011) (0.012) (0.012) Poverty Rate -0.007** -0.006** 0.001 (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) Loyalist -0.437*** 0.050 (0.072) (0.085) Opposition 0.347*** 0.163*** (0.041) (0.049) Loyalist in Ch´ avez State -1.371*** -1.376*** -0.493*** -0.481** (0.131) (0.142) (0.177) (0.194) Loyalist in Opposition State 0.451*** 0.650*** 0.378*** 0.425*** (0.102) (0.116) (0.142) (0.158) Opposition in Ch´ avez State -0.076 0.058 -0.030 0.035 (0.089) (0.096) (0.116) (0.127) Opposition in Opposition State 0.392*** 0.209** 0.186* 0.087 (0.075) (0.084) (0.102) (0.112) Ch´ avez Governor Baseline -0.461*** -0.709*** (0.078) (0.089) Time in Application -0.065*** -0.175*** (0.012) (0.017) Carta Agraria 1.224*** 0.757*** (0.129) (0.155) Permanency Rights 1.432*** 0.699*** (0.139) (0.167) Title Registration 3.548*** 3.331*** (0.141) (0.173) Voting Center Fixed Eﬀects NO NO NO YES YES YES Observations 23890 23890 23890 14666 14666 14666 *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01 (two-tailed) Estimations conducted on set of land applicants in INTi’s application sys tem for more than 15 months. Standard errors clustered by voting center. Baseline for pol itical variables is petition non-signers in Model 1 and petition non-signers in states with opposit ion governors in Models 2-3. Baseline for political variables in Model 4 is petition non-signers wi thin a given voting center. Baselines for political variables in Models 5-6 are petition non-signer s within a given voting center, where the governor’s partisan aﬃliation corresponds to the st ate where the voting center is located. 43 Table 7: Clientelism in Federal Electoral Regimes, 2008 Clientelistic Level of Country Targeting Index Clientelism Regime Type Argentina 16.98 High Democracy Brazil 15.30 High Democracy Czech Republic 10.63 Low Democracy India 15.68 High Democracy Malaysia 12.30 Medium Hybrid Mexico 15.78 High Democracy Nigeria 15.05 High Hybrid Pakistan 14.20 Medium Hybrid Russia 12.86 Medium Closed Dictatorship Serbia 13.50 Medium Democracy South Africa 12.38 Medium Democracy Spain 11.34 Low Democracy United States 10.10 Low Democracy Venezuela 16.99 High Hybrid Notes: Clientelistic targeting index from Kitschelt (2013). The inde x runs from virtually no clientelistic targeting (a value of 5) to extr emely high (20) targeting eﬀorts. Federal states that score above 10 (“minor eﬀort”) are included here. Data on federal systems is taken from Bakke and Wibbels (2006), who classify federal countries as those with an intermediate (between local and national) level of government with nontrivial, independent powers. Data on hybrid (competitiv e authoritarian) regimes is taken from Levitsky and Way (2010) and otherwise ﬁlled in following Donno (2013). 44 Figure 1: Application Status of Land Applicants, 2007-2009 45 Appendix for “The Role of Subnational Politicians in Distributive Politics” On page 1 of this document is a full set of summary statistics (Table 1) f or the variables used in the analyses. Pages 2-3 give a more detailed depiction of the size and mak eup of voting centers. Pages 4-5 present the results cited in the manuscript for the role of m ayors in land grants. Pages 6-9 further probe the plausibility of a turnout strategy. 1 Summary Statistics The top panel includes variables from a random sample of 200,000 registered vot ers from Maisanta as well as whether or not they applied for land through INTi. The bottom panel includes data from all INTi land applicants during the period April 2007-February 2009. Table 1: Summary statistics Maisanta Sample Variable Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max. N Age 47.0100 16.1156 21 106 198354 Misiones 0.1028 0.3037 0 1 200000 log(Rural Population) 6.8592 3.6856 0 11.0235 199516 Poverty Rate 27.6404 10.461 3.83 71.36 199516 % Ch´ avez vote (Centro) 74.1440 11.2455 30.08 100 199999 INTi land applicant 0.0097 0.0981 0 1 200000 Opposition 0.2583 0.4377 0 1 199999 Loyalist 0.1181 0.3227 0 1 200000 PSUV mayor 0.6786 0.467 0 1 199516 PSUV governor 0.5412 0.4983 0 1 199516 INTi Land Applicants Variable Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max. N Age 48.0864 12.9493 21 128 122234 Misiones 0.166 0.3721 0 1 122305 log(Rural Population) 8.7179 2.1156 0 11.0235 122267 Poverty Rate 34.7969 10.5241 3.83 71.36 122267 INTi land beneﬁciary 0.0504 0.2187 0 1 145411 INTi legal review 0.1477 0.3548 0 1 145411 Application Time (months) 10.5808 4.8034 1 23 142144 Opposition 0.2073 0.4053 0 1 122305 Loyalist 0.1226 0.328 0 1 122305 PSUV mayor 0.8479 0.3591 0 1 122267 PSUV governor 0.8157 0.3877 0 1 122267 Abstention 0.4 0.4899 0 1 84752 Adjudication 0.0775 0.2675 0 1 145411 Carta agraria 0.4452 0.497 0 1 145411 Permanency rights 0.3738 0.4838 0 1 145411 Title registration 0.1034 0.3045 0 1 145411 Voters (Centro) 2053.9912 1757.1424 19 10762 122305 Foreigners (Centro) 232.2378 690.3551 0 7939 122305 1 2 Voting Centers in Rural and Urban Areas Most of the models in the manuscript compare individuals within voti ng centers ( centros) to control for unobserved local heterogeneity that may impact both political pref erences and the likelihood of applying for and receiving a land grant through the land reform program. Thi s is because unobserved individual factors such as income are fairly homogenous within a given voti ng center. As argued by Lander and L´ opez Maya (2005, 47), the very small size of voting centers cont ributes to their “homogenous socioeconomic composition.” Voting centers are often placed i n schools or other public buildings in the neighborhood close to a voter’s residence (Wells 1980, 38). This section gives a visual depiction of centrosize in both urban and rural areas to provide a more concrete sense of what constitutes a centro. There were a total of nearly 8,600 voting centers for the 2004 recall referen dum, and an average of 1,400 voters per voting center.1The average voting center among land applicants had about 2,000 individuals. As a result, the unit of the voting center is much smal ler than a municipality or even a parish, and typically consists of a couple city blocks, part of a small town, or a short stretch of valley. Figure 1 maps the Barrio Agricultura neighborhood within the Petare neighborhood of Caracas as well as the rural parish of Anzo´ ategui in the Mor´ an municipality of Lara st ate. The black dots in each part of the ﬁgure indicate voting centers. In urban areas such as P etare in Part A of Figure 1, each voting center draws from only a couple of blocks within a neighb orhood of the community. In this particular area, which is three to four blocks north to south an d ﬁve to six blocks east to west, there are eight voting centers. Each voting center therefore draws from two or three blocks. Residents in each voting center therefore largely share common publi c utilities, schools, roads, parks, security, and services. Rural areas such as the parish of Anzo´ ategui in the state of Lara, depicted in P art B of Figure 1, generally have voting centers that draw voters from a small stretch of a valley or a few square miles of plains. In this parish, there are seven voting centers. Th ere are two small towns in this parish (Anzo´ ategui and Sabana Grande), and one main stretch of valley betwe en these towns that is used for agricultural purposes. Voting centers are located in thes e small towns as well as in the surrounding valleys, roughly a mile or two apart. The sparsely distri buted population in this and similar areas share in common roads, utilities, stores, and often liveli hoods. 1Note that the average number of voters per centrois diﬀerent from the average centrosize among voters given heterogeneity and that some have only a few voters. 2 Figure 1: Example Voting Centers in Urban and Rural Areas (a) Voting Centers in Barrio Agricultura, Petare, Miranda State (b) Voting Centers in Anzo´ ategui Parroquia, Lara State Note: Black dots indicate voting centers ( centros de votaci´ on ). 3 3 The Lesser Role of Mayors in Land Grants The manuscript discusses whether mayors have less inﬂuence ov er the distribution of land grants than governors; a ﬁnding that their political aﬃliation is less relevan t for who receives land than that of governors would support the theory. This section reports the fu ll results discussed in that part of the paper. Table 2 presents a series of models that examine the role of both mayors and governors in the likelihood that an individual receives a land grant. The Table 2 mode ls are speciﬁed similarly to Models 4-6 of Table 3 of the paper, and thus compare individuals within v oting centers. However, the baseline categories of comparison in these models are now petition n on-signers in voting centers located in municipalities whose mayor’s andgovernor’s political aﬃliation corresponds with that of the location of a given voting center. If mayoral political aﬃliation is l ess important than that for governors, we should observe that the coeﬃcients for individuals of a particular political aﬃlia- tion (e.g., loyalists) and with a ﬁxed governor political aﬃliation (e.g. , pro-Ch´ avez) are statistically indistinguishable across various mayoral political aﬃliations . Furthermore, the coeﬃcients by indi- vidual/governor political aﬃliation should be similar in direction to th e Table 3 coeﬃcients regardless of the political aﬃliation of an individual’s mayor. Table 2 largely bears out these expectations, serving as a successful “placebo test” for the theory. Using the Model 3 results, we fail to reject the null hypothesis t hat the coeﬃcients on loyalists in pro vs. opposition municipalities within states with pro-Ch´ avez go vernors are statistically diﬀerent (p>0.81), that the coeﬃcients on loyalists in pro vs. opposition municipal ities within opposition states are statistically diﬀerent (p >0.15), and that the coeﬃcients on opposition individuals in pro vs. opposition municipalities within opposition states are statistic ally diﬀerent (p >0.69). Only the coeﬃcients on opposition individuals in pro vs. opposition municipal ities within states with pro- Ch´ avez governors are statistically distinguishable. However, and con sistent with Table 3, neither of these coeﬃcients is distinguishable from zero. The Table 2 coeﬃcients are also largely similar in direction and magnitu de to the Table 3 coeﬃ- cients. Loyalists in municipalities with a pro-Ch´ avez mayor with in states with a pro-Ch´ avez governor are more likely to receive land grants than petition non-signers in the se municipalities; opposition individuals in these municipalities are not. Loyalists in municip alities with a pro-Ch´ avez mayor in states with an opposition governor are less likely to receive land grants ; the same is true of opposition individuals in these municipalities (though the latter coeﬃcien t is just short of conventional levels of statistical signiﬁcance in Models 1 and 3). Loyalists in municipaliti es with an opposition mayor in states with a pro-Ch´ avez governor are more likely to receive land (th ough again the coeﬃcients are barely shy of statistical signiﬁcance, perhaps because only 8% of applican ts reside in these locales and estimates are somewhat imprecise); opposition individuals in the se municipalities are not. The only results that diﬀer in sign from Table 3 are loyalists in municipal ities with an opposition mayor in states with an opposition governor. The coeﬃcients are far from signiﬁ cant, however, and data are sparsest in such municipalities; only 7% of applicants reside in t hese locales. 4 Table 2: Who Beneﬁts? Logit Analyses of the Role of Political Preferences an d Mayors in Receiving Land Grants (Dependent Variable: Land Reform Beneﬁciary) Matched by voting center Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Age 0.005*** 0.000 0.003** (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) Misiones 0.063 0.087 0.079 (0.049) (0.053) (0.054) Loyalist in Ch´ avez Muni and Ch´ avez State 0.425** 0.424** 0.403* (0.170) (0.203) (0.210) Opposition in Ch´ avez Muni and Ch´ avez State 0.158 0.230 0.149 (0.116) (0.152) (0.150) Loyalist in Ch´ avez Muni and Opposition State -0.402** -0.461** -0.441** (0.157) (0.189) (0.198) Opposition in Ch´ avez Muni and Opposition State -0.147 -0.279** -0.173 (0.104) (0.141) (0.138) Loyalist in Opposition Muni and Ch´ avez State 0.393 0.368 0.351 (0.255) (0.281) (0.294) Opposition in Opposition Muni and Ch´ avez State -0.090 -0.299 -0.271 (0.202) (0.227) (0.214) Loyalist in Opposition Muni and Opposition State 0.301 0.292 0.220 (0.257) (0.304) (0.308) Opposition in Opposition Muni and Opposition State 0.002 -0.010 -0.047 (0.168) (0.216) (0.212) Time in Application 0.396*** 0.432*** (0.006) (0.008) Carta Agraria 0.283*** (0.092) Permanency Rights 0.460*** (0.096) Title Registration -1.274*** (0.135) Voting Center Fixed Eﬀects YES YES YES Observations 62280 62280 62280 *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01 (two-tailed) Estimations conducted on full sample of land applicants. Standard errors clustered by voting center. Baselines for political variables are petition non-s igners in municipalities whose mayor’s and governor’s political aﬃliation corresponds with that of t he location of a given voting center. 5 4 Voter Turnout and Land Reform Beneﬁts Table3belowinvestigateswhetherlandgrantsarebeingusedtoturn outloyaliststhatmayotherwise abstain, or simply to reward loyal PSUV supporters such as activists or p arty oﬃcials. The ﬁgures below provide tentative evidence on whether turnout attempts are successful or not. Table 3 examines whether abstainers in those states where grants are un likely to be disrupted by local politicians - states with pro-Ch´ avez governors - are more like ly to become beneﬁciaries than non-abstainers. Focusing on pro-Ch´ avez states ensures the observe d eﬀect is due to government targeting rather than an artifact of the mix of government targeting and pote ntial disruption by opposition politicians. Table 3 displays the results of a series of con ditional logit models that group individuals by voting center. A dummy variable from Maisanta for abstention is included, which is coded “1” if an individual had ever abstained from voting. Abstention is insigniﬁcant in Model 1, indicating that land grants are not systematically given to activists that have a strong voting record. But because this mode l does not distinguish Ch´ avez supporters from opponents, Model 2 introduces interaction terms b etween abstention and whether an individual signed the petition for or against Ch´ avez. The coeﬃcient on abstention now captures petition non-signers that have abstained from voting in the past, and th e baseline is petition non- signers who are voters. Model 2 indicates that active PSUV loyalists t hat are consistent voters are not more likely to receive land grants. Instead, it is pro-Ch´ avez ind ividuals that signed the petition to recall opposition oﬃcials but who have a history of non-voting that are m ore likely to receive land. This is consistent with a core targeting strategy given the importance of turnout. In short, Table 3 suggests that Ch´ avez is engaged in a core voter strategy to enhance turnout as opposed to rewarding loyal activists who are also likely voters. Were eﬀorts at turnout actually successful? Although data on subsequen t beneﬁciary turnout are unfortunately unavailable, preventing an individual-level anal ysis, it is possible to examine more aggregated changes in Ch´ avez vote share before and after this set of land grants were given to see whether Ch´ avez support increased more in areas that received more gran ts. Taken together with the core voter targeting ﬁndings, this would be evidence consistent wit h a successful turnout strategy. However, given the potential impact of other factors such as other governm ent social programs (that may be correlated with land reform) we cannot with certainty attr ibute changes in vote share speciﬁcally to land reform policies. Using electoral data at the municipal level for the December 2006 presid ential elections and September 2010 parliamentary elections, Figure 2 examines the change in Ch´ avez vote share as a function of land grants. Overall Ch´ avez support declined between t he 2006 and 2010 elections. There is nonetheless a positive relationship between the change in Ch´ avez vote share and land grants. Figure 2 notes the names of the states and municipalities which experienced higher rates of land reform and greater positive changes in Ch´ avez vote share between 2006 an d 2010. Because the ﬁgure compares electoral results within municipalities, it holds c onstant demographic factors that did not change substantially over time. The ﬁgure suggests that and refor m is likely to have had the greatest political payoﬀs in states such as Lara, Gu´ arico, and Apure. 6 Table 3: Who Beneﬁts? Logit Analyses of Political Preferences and Voter Turnout in Receiving Land Grants (Dependent Variable: Land Reform Beneﬁciary) Matched by voting center Model 1 Model 2 Age 0.003 0.003 (0.002) (0.002) Mision 0.095 0.092 (0.059) (0.060) Abstention 0.004 -0.086 (0.057) (0.068) Loyalist Voter -0.126 (0.110) Opposition Voter -0.125 (0.089) Loyalist Abstainer 0.304** (0.147) Opposition Abstainer 0.235 (0.146) Time in Application 0.431*** 0.431*** (0.011) (0.011) Carta Agraria 0.338** 0.339** (0.146) (0.146) Permanency Rights 0.584*** 0.586*** (0.150) (0.150) Title Registration -0.427** -0.422** (0.185) (0.185) Observations 31635 31635 Voting Center Fixed Eﬀects YES YES Observations 31635 31635 *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01 (two-tailed) Estimations conducted on states with pro-Ch´ avez governors. Standard errors clustered by voting center. Baseline is petition non-signers who are voters. 7 Figure 2: Eﬀect of Land Grants on Voting Pattern Changes, 2006-2010 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08-0.3 -0.2-0.0.00.10.20.3Effect of Land Grants on Voting Patterns Land Recipients (% of pop.)Change in Chavez Support 2006-10APUREMP. ACHAGUASAPUREMP. MU#OZ APUREMP. PEDRO CAMEJO B    I NASMP. AR I S   N D ICOJEDESMP. FALCON GUAR ICOMP. CAMAGUAN GUARICOMP. MIRANDAGUARICOMP. ROSCIOLARAMP. ANDRES E BLANCO L A AMP. U  DANETA MER IDAMP. ALBERTO ADRIANI MERIDAMP. ANTONIO PINTO S.MON     	    URACOA PORT UGUESAMP. OSPINO Note: The ﬁgure notes the names of the states and municipalities which e xperienced higher rates of land reform and greater positive changes in Ch´ avez vote share between 2006 and 2010. For each locale, state names are ﬁrst listed followed “MP.” and then municipal names. Although the total percentage of land recipients during the period usi ng the INTi data was rather low, it only includes land beneﬁciaries through INTi from mid 2007-early 2009. As indicated in the manuscript, there are many more individuals (about ﬁve times as many) w ho had applied for land grants that had moved toward the end of the land grant process in 2009 (where these data end) and were likely to have become beneﬁciaries in 2010. There could have b een other beneﬁciaries in late 2009-2010 as well. Finally, given the size of rural families, several more individuals are typically aﬀected by a land grant than the applicant. Figure 3 takes a closer look at municipal-level vote share for the PSUV in 2006 and 2010 in Apure, Gu´ arico, and Lara, those states in which the political payoﬀs may h ave been greatest as indicated in Figure 2. There are 31 municipalities in these states. M unicipalities above the solid line had an absolute increase in Ch´ avez vote share from 2006-2010. The solid dot is the a verage 2006 and 2010 Ch´ avez vote share in all municipalities, which puts the munic ipalities in Apure, Gu´ arico, and Lara in perspective relative to the rest of the country. In all of th ose municipalities which lie above the dotted line, the 2006-10 change in Ch´ avez vote share was more favorab le to Ch´ avez than 8 in the average municipality. There are several noteworthy trends. First, in most of Apure, Gu´ aric o, and Lara, Ch´ avez support is high - around 70%. Second, in these states where there was greater land r eform, Ch´ avez did better in 2010 relative to those places where there wasn’t as much land reform. T he ﬁgure highlights the names of municipalities where Ch´ avez had the best turnout in 2010. As ind icated by comparing this ﬁgure to Figure 2, these are places where land reform was most active. Figure 3: Ch´ avez Vote Share in Apure, Lara, and Gu´ arico, 2006-2010 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.800.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8Chavez Vote Share in Apure, Lara, and Guarico 2006-10 Chavez Support 2006Chavez Support 20 10 Line indicates equal vote share in 2006 and 2010 Points above line are municipalities where Chavez gained suppo rt in 2010 Solid dot indicates average municipal Chavez vote in 2006 and  2010 Municipalities above dotted line indicate greater than avera ge change in Chavez vote 200APUREMP. MU#OZ APUREMP. P    RO C      GUARCOM   C M   UANLARAMP. ANDR ES E  ANCOLARAMP. SIMON PLANAS LARAMP. TORRES ARAMP. UR DANETA Note: For each locale named, state names are ﬁrst listed followed “MP.” and then municipal names. 9