The BIAS FREE Framework

A practical tool for identifying and eliminating
social biases in health research

 

by

Mary Anne Burke
Global Forum for Health Research

Geneva, Switzerland

and

Margrit Eichler

Ontario Institute for Studies in Education

University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
 

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank our husbands, Joe Burke and Donald Payne, and our families for their support
of our work over the years. We are especially grateful to Hannah Burke, Maria Musarella, Peter
Park, Parteepan Rasaratnam, Gregor Wolbring, and the many other disabled people who opened
our eyes to their world and challenged us to push the boundaries of our work. Particular thanks
are owed to the students who challenged our Framework during their coursework at the University
of Toronto and at the University of Hildesheim, Germany and the many workshop participants
in Canada, Costa Rica, Germany, India, Mexico, Senegal, Switzerland, Tanzania, and at the United
Nations in New York, who provided us with valuable feedback and constructive criticism over
the 11-year development of the Framework.

We are particularly indebted to a small group of men and women in Costa Rica who
participated in a gender-based analysis (GBA) training workshop as part of a process to convert
a maternity hospital into a “real” women’s hospital. Insights from these workshop participants led
us to the development of what is presented here as the BIAS FREE Framework.

In particular, we wish to cordially thank Lee Ann Basser, Joe Burke, George Dei, Diana
Gustafson, Santiago Joseph, Stephen Matlin, D. Craig McKie, Roxanne Mykitiuk, Sheryl Nestel,
Doris Rajan, Jean-Paul Restoule, Margaret Sills, Lorraine Touchette and Gregor Wolbring for
their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this book, and Melissa Abbey, Linggin Feng, Victoria
Kay, Margie Lauzon, Lichun Liu and Shawn Pegg for their valuable research assistance at various
stages. Special thanks are due to our editor, Jane Foy, who tirelessly supported us through many
drafts. We would also like to thank Michael McAuliffe, a multimedia artist living in Ottawa
Canada, who designed the triangular logo for the BIAS FREE Framework.

Finally, we wish to thank the Global Forum for Health Research for their ongoing support
of work on this book, including the dedication of human and financial resources. In particular
we wish to acknowledge the support of Stephen Matlin and Andrés de Francisco for work on this
project. We are grateful to Susan Jupp and her Communications team at the Global Forum for

their efforts to edit, design and lay out the book.

Mary Anne and Margrit
 

About the authors

Mary Anne Burke, Health Analyst/Statistician, Global Forum for Health Research,

Geneva, Switzerland.

Career positions include: Director of Research, The Rocher Institute, Toronto; Coordinator
of the Gender-based Analysis (GBA) Initiative and Senior Policy Analyst, Health Canada; Senior
Analyst, Statistics Canada; Founding team member and editor of Canadian Social Trends, Statistics
Canada; Policy Analyst, Status of Women Canada; and Social Statistician, UNICEF Innocenti

Research Centre, Florence, Italy.

Publications in the areas of public policy, social conditions and human rights include: Child
institutionalisation and child protection in Central and Eastern Europe, Innocenti Occasional
Paper EPS 52, (1995); Federal Plan for Gender Equality tabled by the Canadian Government at
the Fourth United Nations World Conference on Women in Beijing, (co-ed. with D. Ponée
& L. Touchette) (1995); Gender-based analysis: A guide for policy-making, (co-ed. with D. Ponée
& L. Touchette) (1996); "Developing gender-based analysis (GBA) tools for the health sector", in
Health in the Commonwealth Sharing Solutions 1999/2000(1999); "Health Canada's achievements
to date in mainstreaming gender" and "Gender management system for the health sector in
Canada" in Proceedings from the Commonwealth Workshop on Gender Management Systems for the
Health Sector, St. Kitt's and Nevis (1999); Health Canadas GBA Policy)(2000); A dynamic model of
health (co-ed. with M. Bach, R. Coleman, D.C. McKie, & G. Stewart)(2001); Toward an inclusive
approach to monitoring investments and outcomes in child development and learning, (with

M. Bach)(2002); The construction of disability and risk in genetic counselling discourse, (ed.)(2002).

Margrit Eichler, Professor of Sociology and Equity Studies, Ontario Institute for Studies

in Education, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Memberships, in 20 editorial and other boards as well as associations, include: co-editor and
co-founder of Resources for Feminist Research, Past-President of the Canadian Research Institute for
the Advancement of Women; Past-President of the Canadian Sociology and Anthropology
Association, member of the Royal Society of Canada and the European Academy of Sciences.
Consultant for national and international organizations including: Statistics Canada, Canadian
Advisory Council on the Status of Women, Health and Welfare Canada, Canadian Human Rights
Commission, Manitoba Human Rights Commission, Law Reform Commission of Canada,
Attorney General of Ontario, Secretary of State Women's Programme, Status of Women Canada,

Justice Canada, Global Forum for Health Research.

Publications, more than 200, include: The double standard: A feminist critique of feminist social
science, 1980; Women in futures research. (co-ed. with H. Scott), (1980: 49); Canadian families
today: Recent changes and their policy Consequences, (1988); Nonsexist research methods: A practical
guide, (1991); Misconceptions. (co-ed. with G. Basen and A. Lippman), (1994); Change of plans.
Towards a nonsexist city. (ed.)(1995); Family shifts. Families, policies and gender equality. (19974);
Feminist utopias: Re-visioning our futures. (co-ed. with J Larkin and S Neysmith), (2002).
 

Table of Contents

Acknowledgements 000s

About the authors cee

Executive summary 000s

H-

Maintaining an existing hierarchy ...........00 00022
H1 Denial of hierarchy 0000000000 eee
H2 Maintenance of hierarchy ..........00.0..00.00 0000 eee
H3 Dominant perspective 000000 eee
H4 Pathologization 0000000000 eee
H5 Objectification 2000000000 eee
H6 Victim-blaming .....00.0000.000 0002 eee
H7 Appropriation 6.000000.

Failing to examine differences 00000000.
F 1 Insensitivity to difference 20.000.
F2 Decontextualization 900000000 t ener
F3 Over-generalization or universalization .......0...0..00..00..0 00002
Fa Assumed homogeneity .......0...00.0.00 00000

Using Double Standards «00001
D1 Overt double standard 00.0 nner n nee
D2 Under representation or exclusion... ee
D3 Exceptional under-representation or exclusion ................0......0...0...0...
D4 Denying agency ...0 eee
D5 Treating dominant opinions as fact 2.00.00. ee
D6 Stereotyping 66000 eee
D7 Exaggerating differences 200000
D8 Hidden double standard 00.00

Foreword 000 nee

Chapter 1 Introduction 0000.

Rights-based approach |. 000. ttn nnn

Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework... cee

Criteria used to construct the BIAS FREE Framework ..........................
Development of the analytical questions ........0.00.0.00.0....0.0.0 0.0 c eee
The open-ended nature of the BIAS FREE Framework .........................
Moving towards acommon terminology .......................0.0.0 0c eee
The tripartite basis of social inequality and biases..............................
The BiasTriangle 0. eee

I. Maintaining a hierarchy 000000 tcc

2. Failing to examine differences 0000000 ccc

3. Using double standards 000.0000 cece
Solutions to bias problems 9.00.00) cnn nee

 
 

Consequences of the failure to recognize the tripartite nature of biases ........ 13

 

Gender hierarchy
Race hierarchy 00 etree
Ability hierarchy
Benefits of an integrative approach to social hierarchies ....................... 18
Exploring common roots of domination and social inequality ................... 18
Correctly identifying the problem and needed solution ......0.....000000....... 18
Examining both social and biological differences in a non-bierarchical manner... 18
Understanding intersections and compounding effects of biases .................. 19
Probing the nature of the problem 0.000000 cee 19
Recognizing hierarchies within a hierarchy 00.0.0 0 000000 20
Types of applications 00000 cc t nee ee 20
Three-dimensional matrix 9.000000 ccc nee ee 21

The BIAS FREE Framework

 

 

   

H - Maintaining an existing hierarchy
Question: Is dominance of one group over the other in any way justified or maintained? .. 22
H1 Denial of hierarchy ................
H 2 Maintenance of hierarchy
H3 Dominant perspective 0000.00 eee
H4 Pathologization 2.000000 eee
H5 Objectification 0000.00 eee
H6 Victim-blaming ...00.000000000 000s
H7 Appropriation 00000000 eee
F - Failing to examine differences ...002 20220000000 23
Question: Is membership in a non dominant/ dominant group examined as socially ..... . 23
relevant and accommodated?
F 1. Insensitivity to difference 0.000000. eee 23
F2 Decontextualization 9000000 ctr nee nnne 23
F3 Overgeneralization or universalization .......0......00..0 00.0002 c ccc 23
Fa Assumed homogeneity .........0..00.000 0000 eee 23
D - Using Double Standards 2000 23
Question: Are non dominant/dominant groups dealt with differently? .................... 23
D1 Overt double standard 000.0 center nes
D2 Under representation or exclusion 0.00.00... eee
D3 Exceptional under-representation or exclusion
D4 Denying agency 000. eee
D5 Treating dominant opinions asfact .....00.00.000..00.0 0002
D6 Stereotyping 0000 eee
D7 Exaggerating differences..........
D8 Hidden double standard 0.0000 creer
Chapter 3 Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research .................. 25
for health
Applicable at any stage of the research process ............................... 25
Examples of the application of the BIAS FREE Framework to selected ......... 26
research elements
Research proposal 000000 cetera 26
Literature review 00000000 26
Research question and design ©0000 000000000 27
CONCEPTS tent t tect e eects 29
Theoretical frameworks 00000000 cts 31

Research methods and data-gathering 00000000000 cee 32
vi

 

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Data analysis and interpretation 0000000 cece ees 34
Conclusions 000 eee 37
Policy recommendations and practices ..00 0000000 eee 37
Communication of results 00000000 tet 38
Theoretical framework and concepts... 43
Pervasive inequalities 90000 eee 43
Power structures and the generation of knowledge............................ 43
Rights-based model of health 00000 44
Logic of domination 900000 44
Values and objectivity... 00 0000 cece 44
Objectivity as property of a scientific community 0000000000 eee 45
Social construction of knowledge ©0002... cece 45
Biases in health research 00000000 46
Conclusion eens 49
The BIAS FREE Framework for Research... 51

References (cee 55
vii

 

Executive summary

This book presents the BIAS FREE Framework — a tool for identifying and avoiding biases in
health research that derive from any social hierarchy. BIAS FREE stands for Building an Integrative
Analytical System for Recognizing and Eliminating InEquities. The acronym is the statement of a
goal, not an achievement. The BIAS FREE Framework suggests a pathway towards this destina-
tion. In this book we concentrate on biases deriving from three social hierarchies only: those based
on gender, race and ability, and on the application of the Framework to health research, although

in principle it is applicable to all types of research that involve human beings.

The Framework is “integrative” in that it aims to combine, co-ordinate and consolidate the various
analytical lenses that have emerged from these various fields of study into a unified whole. It is
also “integrative” in that it recognizes that health research is a global public good and that as such,
all people have an equal claim to the health research process and its benefits, regardless of their

gender, ability, race or other social characteristics, and works towards this end.

It is therefore premised on a rights-based understanding of health, which in turn rests on the
following three basic relationships:

1. Health policies, programmes and practices have an impact on human rights.

2. Violations or lack of fulfilment of human rights have negative effects on health
(physical, mental, social and spiritual well-being).

3. Health and human rights act in synergy. Promoting and protecting health requires
explicit and concrete efforts to promote and protect human rights and dignity; greater
fulfillment of human rights necessitates sound attention to health and its societal
determinants. Paying attention to the inter-relationship between health and human
rights may help to re-orient thinking about major global challenges to health and to
broaden human rights thinking and practices.

While the BIAS FREE Framework is applicable not just to research but also to legislation,
policies, programmes and practices, in this book the focus is on its application to health research

in particular.

The following underlying criteria were used in developing the approach: that it be
* systematic and comprehensive;
¢ theoretically grounded;
* capable of providing a common terminology describing the various problems;
* applicable to biases deriving from any social hierarchy;
* free from privileging biases deriving from one type of hierarchy (e.g. gender) over those

generating from another one (e.g. ability or race);
viii

 

* capable of identifying intersections and compounding layers of biases deriving from
different social hierarchies;

* applicable to research, legislation, policies, programmes, services and practices;

* applicable to any sector, e.g. health, education, justice, industry, transportation
communication;

* applicable to all types of research, including one's own or that of others; and

* usable at all stages of the research process.

The framework is open-ended, and defines concepts that have variable meanings in the
relevant literatures by operationalizing them through a set of questions that alert the reader to
the presence or absence of a bias that derives from a social hierarchy. The existence of social
hierarchies gives rise to a tripartite set of problems that may play out in research. Efforts aimed at
maintaining a hierarchy, give rise to the first of a tripartite set of problems identified in research.
These are clustered in the BIAS FREE Framework under the heading of the Main Problem Type:
Maintaining a Hierarchy. The second set of problems arises when one’s position on a given social
hierarchy is not examined for its relevance, and ensuing differences are not accommodated. This
set of problems is clustered under the Main Problem Type: Failing to Examine Differences. The final
set of problems emerges when different groups are treated differently because of their position
within a social hierarchy. This set of problems is clustered under the Main Problem Type:
Using Double Standards. To identify all three types of problems, we have formulated a set of
abstract questions with yes-no answers (see the Framework at the back of the book). Each of the

questions has its own solution.

Failing to Examine Differences (the F-Problem) and Using Double Standards (the D-Problem)
are two sides of the same coin. The solution to the F-Problem consists of recognizing and
accommodating existing differences by treating people differently, while the solution to the
D-Problem consists of recognizing and eliminating unwarranted differential treatment. The F- and
D-Problems are therefore mutually limiting. The touchstone that lets us decide which type of
problem we are dealing with is whether different or same treatment reduces or reinforces an

existing hierarchy.

Each of the questions comes with a set of sub-questions and the answers. The various bias

problems (which are operationalized in the questions) are:

H- Maintaining an existing hierarchy

H 1 Denial of hierarchy

H 2 Maintenance of hierarchy
H 3 Dominant perspective

H 4 Pathologization

H 5 Objectification

H6 Victim-blaming

H 7 Appropriation
 

F- Failing to examine differences

F 17 Insensitivity to difference

F2 Decontextualization

F3 Over-generalization or universalization
F4 Assumed homogeneity

D- Using Double Standards

D1 Overt double standard

D 2 Under representation or exclusion

D3 Exceptional under-representation or exclusion
D 4 Denying agency

D5 Treating dominant opinions as fact

D6 Stereotyping

D7 Exaggerating differences

D 8 Hidden double standard

The framework is based on a three-dimensional matrix consisting of the type of hierarchy
examined (gender, race, ability, age, class, caste, religion, sexual orientation, etc.), the component
of the research process relevant at any particular point of time (research proposal, literature review,
research question and design, concepts, theoretical framework, research methods, data analysis and

interpretation, conclusions) and the particular type of bias problem.

Extensive examples of all types of biases in all components of the research process are provided.
Since no one is a member of only one hierarchy (i.e. a person may be a woman, black, and highly
educated living in a high-income country with a good job, or may be a white man, disabled, living
in a low-income country) the analytical process is iterative. Different ways of using the framework

are discussed.
 

Foreword

The mission of the Global Forum for Health Research is to promote more research that focuses
on the health needs of developing countries, the neglect of which has come to be symbolized
in the expression ‘10/90 gap’. But to address the real health needs of poor and marginalized
populations, attention is needed not only to the quantity of research but also to its quality and
orientation. The commercial interests of the private sector may combine with disparities in wealth
between countries to influence the public and private sector resources available for health research
for development. In addition, the imbalance this generates may be further compounded by biases
within the research that is conducted.

One important group of biases that arise in health research is associated with social hierarchies,
including those based on ability, class or caste, gender, race or ethnicity, religion and sexual
orientation. The existence of such biases may result, in the health research field, in research that
is not only flawed but that perpetuates and reinforces health inequities. This may arise from the
construction of a research process that is blind to the existence of a bias problem, that emphasizes
differences when particular social groups should be treated equally or, conversely, that fails to
address differences by treating distinct groups as if they were the same.

The BIAS FREE Framework is a new tool, developed as the result of a long-term collaboration
between the authors that can be used systematically to analyse research, either prospectively or
retrospectively. It facilitates the clear identification of the presence of research biases due to social
hierarchies and points to directions for their elimination.

We hope that this publication and the adoption of the Framework it describes will lead to
wider and more systematic efforts to eliminate social hierarchy-based biases from health research,
thereby improving the health of poor and marginalized populations and reducing health

inequalities.

Stephen Matlin
Executive Director

Global Forum for Health Research
 

I Introduction

The intent of this book is twofold: first, to provide a tool — the BIAS FREE Framework — for
examining and eliminating biases in health research that derive from social hierarchies; second, to
present the theoretical underpinnings of the Framework.

The term hierarchy (literally: holy order) indicates a social system in which people are stratified
on a continuum of economic, political and social power. Social hierarchies may be based on
gender, ability, race, religion, geographical location, class, caste and sexual orientation, among
others.

BIAS FREE stands for Building an Integrative Analytical System for Recognizing and Eliminating
InEquities. The acronym is the statement of a goal, not an achievement. The BIAS FREE Frame-
work suggests a pathway towards this destination. In this book we are concentrating on biases
deriving from three social hierarchies only: those based on gender, race and ability, and on the
application of the Framework to health research.! The framework presented here is a work in
progress, as emphasized by the first word in the acronym, building on the available scholarly work
concerning sexism, ableism and racism, and the longstanding work and experience of the authors
(Eichler, 1984, 1991, 1997b; Eichler, Reisman, & Borins, 1992; Eichler, 2002; Eichler & Burke,
2006; Burke, 1995, 1999a, 1999b, 1999c; Burke er al., 2003; Bach & Burke, 2002).

The Framework is “integrative” in that it aims to combine, co-ordinate and consolidate the
various analytical lenses that have emerged from these various scholarships into a unified whole.
It is also “integrative” in that it recognizes that health research is a global public good (Burke &
de Francisco, 2004: 84), and that as such, all people have an equal claim to the health research
process and its benefits, regardless of their gender, ability, race or other social characteristics, and

works towards this end.

Rights-based approach

The BIAS FREE Framework is premised on the equal entitlement of all people to be treated with
respect, and on the inviolability of human rights. The Framework derives from the understanding
of health as a human right and uses a rights-based model of health and well-being. The Preamble
to the WHO Constitution? sets out that, “[t]he enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
health is one of the fundamental rights of every human being without distinction of race, religion,

political belief, economic or social condition” (World Health Organization, 1948).

 

! The Framework can be applied to any subject involving human beings.

? The Constitution was adopted by the International Health Conference held in New York from 19 June to 22 July 1946,
signed on 22 July 1946 by the representatives of 61 States (Off? Rec. Wid Hith Org., 2, 100), and entered into force on
7 April 1948. Amendments adopted by the Twenty-sixth, Twenty-ninth and Thirty-ninth World Health Assemblies
(resolutions WHA26.37, WHA29.38 and) came into force on 3 February 1977, 20 January 1984 and 11 July 1994,
respectively, and are incorporated in the present text.

 
Introduction

 

The rights-based model of health rests on three basic relationships:

1. Health policies, programmes and practices have an impact on human rights.

2. Violations or lack of fulfillment of human rights have negative effects on health
(physical, mental, social and spiritual well-being).

3. Health and human rights act in synergy. Promoting and protecting health requires
explicit and concrete efforts to promote and protect human rights and dignity; greater
fulfilment of human rights necessitates sound attention to health and its societal
determinants. Paying attention to the inter-relationship between health and human
rights may help to re-orient thinking about major global challenges to health and to
broaden human rights thinking and practices (Mann et al., 1999: 5-7).

Health (physical, mental, social and spiritual well-being) is fundamentally tied to human
rights and social equality. In moving towards a broad definition of health focused on the well-being
of people, WHO “helped to move health thinking beyond a limited, biomedical, and pathology-
based perspective to the more positive domain of ‘well-being’...and radically expanded the scope
of health, and by extension, the roles and responsibility of health professionals and their relations
to the larger society” (Mann et al., 1999: 8).

The link between broad social inequities and inequities in health has long been recognized
(Ferrie et al., 2002; World Health Organization, 1986) and is the current focus of the WHO
Commission on the Social Determinants of Health (World Health Organization, 2006). Poverty
and social exclusion also derive from social inequities, and are key risks to health (World Health
Organization, 2006: 3-4). Addressing the underlying inequities that emerge from the maintenance
of social hierarchies is thus central to addressing health inequities, poverty, and social exclusion.

The BIAS FREE Framework is designed to draw attention to the structural and organizational
determinants of health, to assist in identifying biases in health research that derive from various
social hierarchies, and in removing them, insofar as is possible.

The underlying theoretical framework draws on a long history of scholarly research related to
the social dimensions of scientific knowledge, power and access to resources. Social hierarchies are
built on the basis of gender, ability, race, class, caste, age, ethnicity, aboriginal status, geographical
region, language, religion and sexual orientation, among others (Abberley, 1997; Blim, 2005;
Munck, 2005; Ravaud & Stiker, 2001; Rothman, 1993; Shakespeare & Watson, 2001).

In every society, access to social goods, decision-making and economic and
social well-being is shared unequally among all members depending on where
they fit within the various social hierarchies (Desai & Johnson, 2005;
Lenski, 1984; Shookner, 2002). Power structures within a society serve to
reinforce and maintain the various social hierarchies, and the distribution of
resources according to people’s position within the various social hierarchies
(Johnson, 2004).

In describing where people fit within a given hierarchy, and to facilitate our integrative
approach to the various social hierarchies, we use abstract language applicable to all hierarchies.
For example, we use the term “dominant group” to mean those at the top end of a hierarchy —
those with the most power and ability to access and use the resources that accrue to them because
of their position in a hierarchy. We use the term “non-dominant group” to mean those whose po-
sition is further down the hierarchy and who are not as easily able to yield power and access and
accrue resources. The terms dominant and non-dominant are always understood in relation to each
other, within a given socio-political context.

Historically, women, disabled people, and others belonging to certain classes or ethnic, racial,
linguistic or religious groups have tended to be disadvantaged relative to men, to "non-disabled"

people, and other dominant groups in their society (Rossides, 1997; Schriner, 2001). Membership
Introduction

 

in more than one non-dominant group compounds the discrimination that people experience, and
increases social, political, economic and other inequities.

A disabled woman living in a low-income country in Africa or Asia, for example, would likely
have access to fewer social, economic and community resources than would a white able-bodied
woman living in a high-income country. Her experience, however, might not be so different from

that of a disabled Aboriginal woman living on a remote "Indian" reserve in Canada.

The problem of discrimination is compounded for disabled members of the
lesbian and gay communities, disabled black people, disabled women and
disabled members of other marginalised groupings... This is because in addition
to disability they frequently experience other forms of discrimination such as
heterosexism, racism, sexism etc. Thus, if a disabled person is also a member
of one or more marginalised groups their experience of discrimination will be
more complex and its consequences further disempowering. When explaining
the outcome of disability, therefore, the likelihood of simultaneous oppression
should always be considered (Barnes, 1992: 5).

Depending on which hierarchy is at work, people may experience both dominant and non-
dominant status. For example, an African man may be in a dominant group relative to an African
woman (gender hierarchy), and within African society experience a position of privilege. He
may, however, also find himself in a non-dominant position relative to a white man (or woman)
from a low-income country (hierarchy based on development status/race/geographical location),
and experience social deprivation and powerlessness relative to those with higher status on the
global stage.

Understanding that the logic of domination does not change across hierarchies, although it
manifests in diverse ways across social hierarchies and contexts, enriched our understanding of the
manifestations of biases derived from each of the hierarchies. This opened our eyes to similar
manifestations in other hierarchies and allowed us to construct an integrative Framework for

identifying and removing biases, to which we now turn.
 

li The BIAS FREE Framework

The BIAS FREE Framework is a systematic and integrative approach designed to identify biases
that derive from any social hierarchy, such as those based on gender, race, ability, religion,
geographical location, class/caste and sexual orientation, among others. Removing biases that
derive from social hierarchies is a necessary but not sufficient condition for good research. There
are other biases that derive from other sources, such as general methodological errors, that will not
be detected using the BIAS FREE approach. This Framework will, therefore, make otherwise
sound research better, but it will not overcome all problems. A project may, for example,
be unbiased in terms of gender, race or ability hierarchies, but completely trivial or based on
technically faulty presuppositions or unsound methodologies.

The BIAS FREE Framework is applicable not just to research but also to legislation, policies,
programmes and practices. It is also transferable to any policy sector — not just health. It could
be used, for example, in the education, justice or transportation sectors. For the purposes of this
book, the focus is on applications of the BIAS FREE Framework in the health sector, and in health

research in particular.

Criteria used to construct the BIAS FREE Framework
Any approach that aims to be integrative and comprehensive needs to meet some rather stringent
criteria. In constructing the BIAS FREE Framework, the underlying criteria were that the
approach needed to be:
* systematic and comprehensive;
¢ theoretically grounded;
* capable of providing a common terminology describing the various problems;
* applicable to biases deriving from any social hierarchy;
* free from privileging biases deriving from one type of hierarchy (e.g., gender) over
those generating from another one (e.g. ability or race);
* capable of identifying intersections and compounding layers of biases deriving from
different social hierarchies;
* applicable to research, legislation, policies, programmes, services and practices;
* applicable to any sector, e.g. health, education, justice, industry, transportation,
communication;
* applicable to all types of research, including one's own or that of others; and
¢ usable at all stages of the research process.
The BIAS FREE Framework has been developed to help researchers and others recognize
when biases exist, and to identify means to eliminate them. The Framework provides a set of
questions aimed at discovering whether social hierarchies are at work in research, and if so, whether

they are producing bias. The questions in the Framework probe the particular nature of the

 
Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

problem so that appropriate solutions can be applied to the identified problem. Answering the
questions at each step of the research will reveal whether social hierarchies are at work or not, and
if so, whether or not they are producing bias. If hierarchies are not found to be at work, or
if no bias is found, the researcher can proceed to the next stage of research. If bias is found, the
Framework points to appropriate solutions the researcher may take to address the particular

bias problem identified.

Development of the analytical questions

The analytical questions of the BIAS FREE Framework originated from questions developed
while exploring the literature on sexism in research. For example, a critique might have been
made of a specific study that dealt only with males but in which the conclusions were presented
as universally applicable. The first step was to reduce the problem identified in the critique to
a single statement (e.g. this article deals only with males but its conclusions are discussed as if
they apply to both sexes) and then transform it into a question: Is information about males
extended to females? Following this, an extensive review of the literature was conducted to find
whether this formulation of the question would help us recognize the same problem within a
different subject matter and discipline. The importance of abstract questions lies in the trans-
ferability that they allow from one subject area to another. If we were unable to find another
example, the question was put aside until we found another example. If the question did help
to identify problems, it was added to the Framework. The same approach was carried through
with all other problems.

The next step involved the transformation of the gender-based questions into abstract language
using the terms dominant/non-dominant group in lieu of male/female. Our sample question was
thus transformed into the following formulation: is information about a dominant group extended
to anon-dominant group without testing its applicability? From this abstract version, which is the
version we are using in the BIAS FREE Framework, we translated it into various hierarchies:

is information on whites applied to people of colour? Is information about people with normative

bodies and minds applied to disabled people? The literature was searched again for examples
concerning both racist and ableist examples in the literature. In the process, questions were
formulated and reformulated many, many times.

If we found a problem that was not yet a part of our inventory, we added it and searched for
examples in the other hierarchies. For instance, appropriation is a problem that comes from the
anti-racist literature. After we had a formulation that seemed to work, we applied it to the gender
and ability hierarchies. We had previously included a problem in the gender hierarchy known
as “naming.” An example of this is when women are identified by their husband's name, e.g.
Mrs. David Smith. “Naming” was eventually eliminated as a category as it could be included
under “appropriation”.

This process of going back and forth among the hierarchies proved to be quite advantageous.
Learning from the problems within each of the hierarchies opened our eyes to similar manifesta-
tions in other hierarchies, thus enriching our understanding of the manifestations of biases derived
from each of the hierarchies. It also pointed the way towards an understanding that the logic of
domination does not change across hierarchies, although it manifests in diverse ways across social

hierarchies and contexts.

The open-ended nature of the BIAS FREE Framework

The BIAS FREE Framework is open-ended. If problems within any of the hierarchies are identified
that are currently not part of any of the problems so far identified, a similar process could be
undertaken and it could be added to the Framework. Similarly, other elements of the research
process could be added. Most importantly, more hierarchies can be added, such as age, sexual

orientation, class, caste, religion or geographical location.
Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework

 

Moving towards a common terminology

One problem in the literature on bias in research is that there is no uniformity in the meaning of
the terminology used to describe the various bias problems, particularly across hierarchies. Good
examples of this are the multiple meanings of “gender sensitivity” and “appropriation”.

Clearly, it would be desirable to move towards a common understanding of the meaning of
the terminology used for each problem. This is the reason for preceding each question in the BIAS
FREE Framework with a concept. The question that follows is, in fact, the definition of the
concept, and serves to identify the problem. This makes it is easy to see exactly what is meant by
each concept, to compare its definition to definitions used elsewhere in the literature, and to sort

through some of the confusion of terminology in the literature.
g BY

The tripartite basis of social inequality and biases

Social inequality — and the biases that derive from it in research — are perpetuated through the
maintenance of social hierarchies. The existence of a social hierarchy gives rise to a tripartite set
of problems that may play out in research. Efforts aimed at maintaining a hierarchy give rise to
the first of a tripartite set of problems identified in research. These are clustered in the BIAS FREE
Framework under the heading of the Main Problem Type: Maintaining a hierarchy. The second
set of problems arises when one’s position in a given social hierarchy is not examined for its
relevance, and ensuing differences are not accommodated. This set of problems is clustered under
the Main Problem Type: Failing to examine differences. The final set of problems emerges when
different groups are treated differently because of their position within a social hierarchy. This set
of problems is clustered under the Main Problem Type: Using double standards. To identify all
three types of problems, we have formulated a set of abstract questions with yes-no answers (see
the Framework at the back of the book). Each of the questions has its own solution.

Failing to examine differences (the F-Problem) and Using double standards (the D-Problem) are
two sides of the same coin. The solution to the F-Problem consists of recognizing and accommo-
dating existing differences, by treating people differently, while the solution to the D-Problem con-
sists of recognizing and eliminating unwarranted differential treatment. The F- and D-Problems
are therefore mutually limiting. The touchstone that lets us decide which type of problem we are
dealing with is whether different or same treatment reduces or reinforces an existing hierarchy.

We have symbolized the tripartite nature of bias problems that derive from social hierarchies

as follows: Maintaining an existing hierarchy

The Bias Triangle

Failing to examine Using
differences double standards

1. Maintaining a hierarchy

All societies stratify people on the basis of gender, ability and class. Race is a stratifying factor in
most societies. Caste is particularly relevant in India and related cultures. Stratification occurs on
the basis of many other factors, including age, religion, language, geographical location, ethnic
background, sexual orientation and physical appearance. No person is situated in only one
hierarchy; everyone experiences stratification along more than one dimension. Where one is
located on a hierarchy is profoundly consequential. Being white, male and having a normative
body and mind are not neutral states of being. The issue is therefore to determine the effect of a
hierarchy within a given context and seek to minimize it. In some cases, this will involve different

treatment, and at other times, same treatment.
Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

Placement on a hierarchy determines one’s access to all types of resources, for example: power
and decision-making; health; education; income; employment; and even the media (Barker, 2005;
Blasiotti, Westbrook, & Kobayashi, 2001; Chen & Wellman, 2005; Denzin, 2005; Eichler, 1989;
Lollar, 2001; Pfohl, 2005). This is somewhat modified by the type of society within which one
lives. For instance, in a society with a socialized medical system, access to health care will be less
stratified than in societies without such a system. Likewise, the tax and social welfare systems and
community infrastructures are other mediating institutions that affect the degree to which access
to resources is more or less differentiated.

Similarly, a hierarchy of power and access to resources exists on a global scale. This hierarchy
of low-income countries (LICs), middle-income countries (MICs) and high-income countries
(HICs) largely overlaps with a global stratification of people by colour — Japan would be one of
the exceptions to this general rule. This hierarchy is exemplified by the extreme concentration of
global wealth in a few countries and among a few people. In 1997, Forbes Magazine estimated
that the world’s three richest people had assets that exceeded the combined gross domestic product
(GDP)? of the 48 lowest-income countries and that the world’s 225 richest people had a combined
wealth that was equal to the annual income of the poorest 47% of the world’s people (United
Nations Development Programme, 1998: 30). This global disparity in wealth is reflected in the global
disparity in infant and maternal mortality and diseases of poverty (Evans et al., 2006; Sims, 2005).

One of the ways in which hierarchies manifest, as discussed earlier, is in knowledge and
knowledge construction, including health research. Whenever researchers deny the existence of a
hierarchy, such as that of race, gender or ability, they actually help maintain it (denying hierarchy).
The same is true if views that are derived from acceptance of hierarchies are presented as normal
or unproblematic, e.g. if an ability hierarchy is presented as a natural way of valuing people (main-
taining hierarchy). Another way of maintaining hierarchies occurs when, intentionally or uninten-
tionally, the perspective of a dominant group is adopted, e.g. non-normative body structures
and/or functioning are automatically regarded as defects and burdens rather than as a variance
from the norm and part of human diversity (dominant perspective).

Yet another form of maintaining hierarchies manifests when practices that restrict the human
rights of members of non-dominant groups are presented as unproblematic (objectification). For
instance, post "9/11", racial profiling of several non-dominant groups has increased steeply in
North America. Failing to question such procedures objectifies members of the profiled groups.
Another means by which hierarchies are maintained is pathologization. For example, people with
Down Syndrome have a “naturally occurring chromosomal arrangement that has always been a
part of the human condition” (Canadian Down Syndrome Society, 2003); however, people with
Down Syndrome are often pathologized and denied a variety of rights because they are different
from the norm ( Burke et al., 2003).

Victim blaming is another way of maintaining a hierarchy. Whenever an abused woman is
asked, “What did you do to provoke him?" a gender hierarchy is maintained. Similarly, an ability
hierarchy is maintained when we situate disability in the individual rather than focus on removing
societal barriers to the full inclusion and participation of disabled people. In a like manner, a race
hierarchy is maintained when we fail to acknowledge the negative impact of colonialism on the
behaviour of the colonized people and instead blame them for their situation.

Finally, appropriation is yet another form of maintaining a hierarchy. Colonial history is rife
with the appropriation by the colonizers of lands, people, artefacts and cultural knowledge (Smith,
1999). And it continues today, as many traditional medicines are being appropriated under patents
taken out by the pharmaceutical industry (Shiva, 1997). The practice of taking away a woman’s
name upon marriage and assigning her the husband’s name instead is another instance of appro-

priation that is still taking place. In one Canadian province — Quebec — this was changed in 1981

 

3 GDP is used as a proxy for real disposable income (South Africa, 2004:27).
Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework

 

(Eichler, 1997a: 49). A woman retains her name upon marriage just as a man does. However,
in most other parts of the country women still take their husbands’ names, even though it is not

a legal requirement.

2. Failing to examine differences

Failing to examine and accommodate socially relevant differences is the second type of bias prob-
lem. The anti-racist, anti-sexist and anti-ableist literatures have amassed a great deal of evidence
concerning the failure to examine membership in a dominant or non-dominant group in contexts
where it is of pivotal importance. The major form this problem takes is insensitivity to differences
and treating people the same when they should be treated differently. This includes failing to look
at and accommodate social differences within and among each of the hierarchies. In health research,
this also includes the failure to look at and take into account biological differences between
the sexes, or among people with different health conditions and/or non-normative body functions
and structures.

AUS. doctors’ study made global headlines in 1989 with its landmark finding that preventive
use of acetylsalicylic acid (Aspirin)! —probably the most common medication in the world —
reduced first heart attacks by 44% (Physicians' Health Study Website, 2005). Aspirin regimens
quickly spread, as advised by doctors to at-risk patients, and self-prescribed by the wider public
buying low-dose pills over the counter. Just as dramatic — and important — as the original find-
ing was the news in March 2005 that the Aspirin promise was half empty.

The 1981 Physicians Health Study was large-scale but used only male doctors as subjects —
a cause for criticism that, according to one influential health commentator, eventually grew into
a “crescendo of demands that clinical research must always be organized to account for the biologic
differences between women and men” (Levin, 2005: 1366). The later, large-scale Women’s Health
Study found that Aspirin shows no preventive effect for first heart attacks in women, although it
did show a preventive effect on first strokes for women, especially those over the age of 56 (Ridker
et al., 2005). "This is the exact opposite of what we see in men,” according to study researcher
Paul Ridker, MD (Peck, 2005).

The Aspirin case is an illustration of how biases deriving from social hierarchies can manifest
in health research and in public health. Not only did the original research study include only a
dominant social group — men — but the same findings were applied to women (overgeneraliza-
tion). By failing to explore potential differences by sex, the analysis was faulty, and led to faulty
conclusions (insensitivity to differences). The assumption that what was good for the gander was
good for the goose resulted in inappropriate therapy for the condition diagnosed in women.

A subtle way in which we may fail to recognize differences is in dealing with aggregate units
in our analysis without taking the diversity within these units adequately into account. For in-
stance, families, households, compounds, tribes, etc. are made up of people of different sexes,
ages and abilities, and their interests may diverge in very significant ways (insensitivity to differ-
ences). A study in northern Ethiopia, for example, found that women are likely to spend more
money on prevention of malaria than men in comparable households (Lampieri, Poulos, Cropper,
Mitiku, & Whittington, 1999). Looking at consumption preference of various items by taking
only household income into account would, therefore, be misleading.

Another way in which this bias expresses itself is in decontextualization, which happens when
research that deals with a phenomenon with potentially different implications for dominant and
non-dominant groups fails to examine these differences and treats people the same. An example
of decontextualization would be a city-planning process that fails to recognize the needs of people

who use devices to assist their mobility and, therefore, ends up with an infrastructure that is not

4 Aspirin®, first registered in Germany in 1899; today, it is a registered trademark of Bayer in Germany and in over 80
countries. The trademark was given up to the US, the UK, Russia and France in 1919 as part of the ‘Treaty of Versailles,
see hetp://www.aspirin.com and http://home.nycap/useless/aspirin/index.html
Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

suitable for this group. This would include people in wheelchairs, babies in strollers, seniors with
walkers and business travellers with heavy luggage on wheels. Decontextualization is among the
most frequently encountered problems in research.

Overgeneralization and universalization result from taking information about the dominant
group and extending it to the non-dominant group without questioning its applicability. Any
study that uses only one sex, one race or non-disabled people and presents its findings as if they
were applicable to everybody is over-generalizing. A variation included under this heading involves
statements that claim to be of universal applicability but in reality fail to take into account the
situation of non-dominant groups. E.g. “The French revolution brought us universal suffrage” —
but not for women. Or “The Canadian state supported the patriarchal family from the beginning
of the 20° century to about 1970” — but not for male Chinese immigrants who were not
permitted to bring their wives with them (Dua, 1999), nor for Aboriginal people whose children
were forcibly removed to residential schools (Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, 1996), or
for disabled people who were put into institutions, prevented from marrying and forcibly sterilized
(McLaren, 1990).

A different type of failing to recognize differences occurs when dominant or non-dominant
groups are treated as homogeneous groups. Everybody belongs to more than one group. Whites
come in more than one sex with different sexual orientations, abilities, class memberships, etc.
People of colour may or may not have high educational attainment; they may be rich or poor;
old or young; male or female; and so on. It is important to pay attention to the way in which the

various hierarchies intersect (assumed homogeneity).

3. Using double standards

Double standards come in two forms: they may be open or hidden. The latter is, by definition,
the most difficult type of bias to detect. There are many types of overt double standards. The
most basic version involves different treatment of non-dominant groups where this different treat-
ment reinforces their subordinate status. An example of an overt double standard is the conceptu-
alization of race. It is only recently that whiteness has been recognized as a racial category, whereas
people of colour have been racialized for a long time (Hurtado & Stewart, 1997: 299). A similar
form of double standard is under-representation or exclusion. For a long time, women were excluded
from drug trials because their hormonal cycles complicated the research projects — but the drugs
so tested were then routinely prescribed to both women and men.

The companion piece to this type of double standard is exceptional under-representation or
exclusion of members of dominant groups in contexts that are relevant to them but that are, for
various reasons, usually associated with non-dominant groups. For instance, most research on
reproductive health issues and on everything related to parenting is done on women, even though
men have separate and different reproductive health issues and typically also have a longer
reproductive span than women. Internationally, fertility is measured by the number of children
per woman in childbearing years, leading to a scarcity of knowledge about male fertility and
sexual behaviour.

Another form of bias is the denial of agency on the part of non-dominant groups, while
dominant groups are often seen only as actors rather than as also acted upon. In particular, the
health system — without justification — often treats disabled people as incapable of making
decisions about their own lives and research is more often conducted about them than by them
(denying agency).

Treating dominant opinions as fact is another expression of a double standard. Sometimes,
the opinions of members of dominant groups about members of non-dominant groups are
treated as facts rather than as opinions. For instance, in occupational health studies, sometimes
only managers, rather than the workers, are asked about the effects of various working condi-
tions on workers. While this may provide relevant information, it should not be taken as equiy-

alent to the actual experience; that is information that can be supplied only by the workers
Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework

11

 

themselves. In historical research, it is important to note the source of information and treat
opinions expressed by, for instance, an upper class male as his opinions only, not representing
the actual situation of servants and women. If non-dominant opinions are the only ones being
taken as fact, this too is a problem, and the solution would be to take the opinion of both
groups as opinions.

A similar problem is treating stereotypes as if they were essential aspects of group membership
rather than as socially constructed; for instance, when race is seen to be indicative of intelligence
(stereotyping) (Rushton, 2000).

Another manifestation of a double standard is the tendency to exaggerate differences: by
categorizing members of non dominant/dominant groups into discrete groups rather than treating
them as groups with overlapping characteristics. For instance, on average, men are taller than
women. However, in almost any large gathering, we would find a very large overlap in size between
the sexes. Rather than conceptualizing size as a dichotomous variable (men as tall, women as
short), we need to think of size as a characteristic that has statistically a different distribution in
terms of sex, but where the overlap is greater than the difference. This becomes theoretically im-
portant when dealing with less tangible character traits that are often used in the construction of
Masculinity-Femininity scales, which use such character traits as independent, gullible, affection-
ate, self-reliant, etc. (exaggerating differences) (Eichler, 1980: 60-90).

Hidden double standards typically manifest when comparable phenomena pertaining to non
dominant and dominant groups are defined in such a manner that they are categorized and valued
differently. To find hidden double standards one needs to look for non-obvious parallels. A classic
example that falls within the gender hierarchy is our definition of work and productivity. It took
decades of scholarly effort to establish that work comes in two forms: paid and unpaid. (For a more

detailed discussion, see Concepts, p30).

Solutions to bias problems

The Framework has been designed to identify and eliminate biases that derive from social
hierarchies and perpetuate social inequality, and in so doing, violate or prevent the fulfillment of
human rights. It is embedded within a human rights perspective that presupposes equality as an
underlying societal value and a commitment to equity as a pathway to achieving equality and
ensuring that all people can enjoy their full human rights (United Nations, 1948). Where there
is no commitment to this goal and its underlying values, dismantling social hierarchies may not
be possible. Effecting social change under these circumstances will require much more concerted
effort to bring about a shift in underlying values.

Eliminating biases due to social hierarchies is an enormous task — challenging existing power
structures and long-standing cultural traditions and practices — and may take many years to
resolve even when there is a commitment to equity and full and equal human rights. Concerted
effort is required at many levels to fully map out these solutions, which may include changes
in policies and practices at both broad macroeconomic levels and in intra- and inter-personal
contexts, and involve diverse players in families, communities, organizations, governments and the
international community.

The Framework is designed to assist in the process of eliminating inequities in health research
so that people can enjoy their full and equal human rights to health. It distinguishes among a
number of complex and interrelated problems, identifying the roots of the problems and pointing
the way to appropriate and responsive solutions. The solutions vary depending on a diverse
number of factors. Within research, some solutions are straightforward and relatively easy
to implement. Others would require a shift in power that will not be brought about only
through research.

Research in and of itself does not change societal structures, although the research may plant
the seeds for doing so. The solutions to bias in research are located at the level of the research

system rather than at a broader societal level. These include addressing bias in individual research
Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

activities, and in the larger field of research, as a system, institution and source of knowledge,
including research priorities identified by countries and the global community. Clearly those who
control the research purse strings are in a dominant position within the global research hierarchy.
Agencies that conduct or sponsor research can use the Framework to critically examine their own
practices and implement significant changes. For individual (or groups of) researchers who may
be recipients of grants or who conduct research independently, the arena for action and application
of the Framework is restricted to the research project itself. Eradicating inequities from health
research is of vital importance in reducing unnecessary deaths and suffering.

When dominance of one group over the other is in any way justified or maintained in research,
the solution is to identify this as a hierarchy problem (H problem) and situate the problem within
a human rights perspective in which equality is an underlying value. The researcher can point out
the discrepancy between this value and the inequalities among groups of people that result from
the hierarchy, and identify the various ways in which this biases research.

When the problem is that membership in a non-dominant/dominant group is not examined
as socially relevant (F problem), the solution is to establish the relevance of such group membership
within a given context. Once relevance is established, it requires that the differences are accom-
modated in ways that reduce the hierarchy.

When the problem is that members of dominant and non-dominant groups are treated
differently, and where such differential treatment maintains a hierarchy (D problem), the solution
is to identify the double standard and devise means to treat both groups the same. Examples of
how this works out in research are presented below.

The nature of solutions also varies across the various elements of the research process. When
conducting one’s own research, the Framework can be used to alert researchers to the possibility
of specific types of bias at any and all stages of their work, and to point to ways to avoid
introducing biases of various sorts. It can also be used when reviewing the work of others. When
conducting a literature review, for instance, a researcher might discover that within a certain sphere
of research, little or no research has been conducted that involves a non-dominant group as
research participant , and/or that most research on this non-dominant group has been conducted
by a dominant group and from its perspective only (H problem).

Solutions to bias problems are multifaceted. While some aspects of the problem can be
addressed directly through research, others require shifts in policy, societal values and attitudes that
extend far beyond the scope of research. If during a literature review, a researcher discovers that
a particular non-dominant group has been excluded from consideration, the solution would be
to document and call attention to this problem, and ensure not to replicate it in his or her own
research. For the granting body, the solution would be to identify biases within its granting
processes that might perpetuate this kind of bias. It would need to examine the various stages of
operations to see where the biases creep in, and address the problems as they are identified.
It could use the Framework to look for biases within its Requests for Proposals (RFPs), funding
criteria and research staffing policies, for example. Universities might look to their student admis-
sion, recruitment, and retention policies and practices, for example, to identify any biases that
might lead to the training of fewer numbers of researchers from that particular non-dominant
group and to influencing the composition of their teaching faculty. Governments might explore the
biases within society that act as barriers for the full-participation of the non-dominant group along

the many life pathways that would prepare them to be actively engaged in the research process.
Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework

 

Consequences of the failure to recognize
the tripartite nature of biases
Much of the voluminous literature on sexist, racist and ableist biases tends to be restricted to only

one or two of the bias problems identified in the Framework.

Gender hierarchy

The gender hierarchy is built on both sex and gender. Sex deals with the biological differences
between females and males. Gender refers to the social construction of norms, values, attitudes,
roles and behaviours attached to being identified as female or male, and are assigned not innate.
These social constructions, and the social structures that reinforce them? (March, Smyth, &
Mukhopadhyay, 1999: 17-18), must be questioned whenever they have consequences for human
rights, values and freedoms.

For the purpose of this book, we refer to the typical distinction between men and women
with respect to sex and gender. While we recognize that sex and gender are not dichotomous
variables, i.e. that a person may have biological characteristics typically associated with both males
and females, may undergo surgery for sex change, or may have a transgendered identity, tackling
these complexities is beyond the scope of this book. Merely adding in a reference to these indi-
viduals every time a reference is made to men and women would not do justice to the biases faced
by people who do not fit the normative definition of male or female from a sex and/or gender
perspective. While this analysis will not be covered in this book, we would encourage others to
apply the Framework to do a full analysis of the problems that result from these biases.

Most of the literature and guides developed to deal with gender-based analysis (GBA)® assume
that the answer to sex and gender bias is gender sensitivity. Here we are dealing with a theoretical
as well as a semantic problem. With respect to semantics, the current international parlance is
that GBA solves the problem of gender bias.’ The term “gender-based analysis” suggests that it
is enough to take biological sex differences and social gender differences into account, rather than to
challenge existing gender hierarchies (that take different forms in different countries, times, ethnic
and religious groups, etc.). The way in which gender-based analysis is understood, then, often
identifies it with gender-sensitive analysis. The problem is compounded by the equation of gender
with sex in much of the literature.

While many researchers are acutely aware of and concerned with the gender hierarchy, there
are also many studies that present themselves as “gender sensitive” without reference to the gender
hierarchy. Gender sensttivity is usually not explicitly defined, but rather is treated as a common-
sense concept. It tends to be operationalized as: a) including women in the analysis; and b) asking
whether there are different 4iological or social circumstances attaching to the situation of women
and men that need to be taken into account within a given context.

While this is helpful as far as it goes, it becomes problematic when the context is taken as
given. If we simply mirror the existing differences through gender-sensitive analysis (recognition
of the biological and social differences between women and men) without questioning the
hierarchy that gives rise to the social (not biological®) differences between the sexes, then we have
failed to identify the hierarchy as problematic and thus have served to maintain it. This is an
important point with relevance for both women and men.

The dominant gender hierarchy is a complex structure that affects men and women, girls and
boys. Assigned gender roles usually disadvantage females and sometimes males. Worldwide,

women tend to be responsible for housework and care for family members (Adkins, 1995; Agassi,

>See Health Canada’s GBA policy for distinction between sex and gender.

© Kenya, Office of the President, & Gender and HIV/AIDS Technical Subcommittee of the National AIDS Control
Council, 2002; Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 1999; March et al., 1999; Status of Women Canada, 1996.

7 An alternative is to identify the problem as sexist research and the solution as non-sexist research, which avoids the
current dilemma. See Eichler, 1991.

8 Some biological differences are socially mediated.
Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

1989; Arrighi & Maume, 2000; Baxter, 1997; Benéria & Roldan, 1987; des Riviéres-Pigeon,
Saurel-Cubizolles, & Romito, 2002; Hochschild, 1989; Major, 1993; Ross, 1987; Sanchez, 1993;
Zuo & Bian, 2001). By contrast, men have historically been assigned the role of provider. A strict
division of labour by gender has negative consequences for both women and men. Men who
would like to participate equally in household work, including childcare, have a harder time find-
ing support for such activities? from their employers. Women experience more interrupted careers,
financial insecurity and higher stress levels from role overload than do men.

Women often lack control over their physical and reproductive well-being, as is evidenced for
example by the high rates of violence against women perpetrated by their partners (Garcia~-Moreno
& France, 2001), unwanted pregnancies and high rates of partner-induced infection with HIV
and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) among women (Fleischman, 2002). At the same
time, within their communities, and both nationally and internationally, women have largely
been excluded from other social spheres, wield little power in decision-making beyond the house-
hold and have less access to the world’s resources than do men. This leaves women relegated to
the household sphere and in a weak position to negotiate their entitlements to rights, equality,
justice, health, dignity and respect, and to benefit from their contributions to society.

Boys are often socialized, from an early age, to “be a man’, not to show their feelings, and not
to complain about how they are feeling. Violence and risk-taking behaviour are also often learnt
from an early age. This plays out later in life as men fail to seek preventive health care and often
engage in risky and violent behaviours, all of which is detrimental to their health.

To be sure, there are exceptions, and as the movement towards gender equality progresses,
traditional gender roles are being questioned and some of the related inequities are being reduced;
but, by and large, the predominant gender hierarchy results in women everywhere remaining

disadvantaged relative to men.

There are infinite numbers of studies to show that to achieve the human rights
of women leads, irresistibly, to the amelioration of the human condition without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion. God knows, that’s what the
world needs. It’s sad, therefore, that in his report to the Commission on the Sta-
tus of Women, whose meetings begin in two days time, the Secretary-General
is forced to point out “that in no country in the world has women’s full de jure
and de facto equality been achieved.”

It’s 2006. What a commentary on male hegemony (Lewis, 2006).

Thus, if we consider only the need for differential treatment, we will fail to note when double
standards are at play and when, therefore, the same treatment (in research and in daily life) is
necessary to reduce the hierarchy. We need to ask both when women and men (girls and boys)
require different rather than the same treatment to achieve equal results as well as when it is
necessary that females and males require the same treatment as the other sex to reduce historical
as well as new forms of discrimination. Underlying this must be awareness that the problems stem
from the gender hierarchy, and that the ultimate solution is the dismantling of the hierarchy.

In the end, both women and men will benefit greatly from this.

Race hierarchy
There are, of course, many types of racism; it changes over time, place and with the socio-political
system, etc. Current versions in North America, for example, include what has been called

“democratic racism” that results from the retention of racist beliefs and behaviours in a “democratic

 

9 Consider the differences in maternity and paternity leaves (beyond the medical leave requited by the mother) in many
countries. (Fagan & Hebson, 2006).
Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework

 

society” (Henry et al., 2000: 19) and “aversive racism” — racial bias that manifests as a pro-white
sentiment and "not simply anti-black sentiment that many traditional theories and measures have
implied” (Gaertner et al., 1997: 175).

Much of the anti-racist literature focuses on, first, the existence and nature of a race hierarchy,
and second, the need to recognize differences between people of colour and whites (as well as
between different peoples of colour, and between “blacks” and Aboriginal people) and the need
for different treatment to ensure equality. Much less has been written about double standards,
relating to different treatment on the basis of “race” when the same treatment would be in order.

The global race hierarchy has been constructed primarily on the basis of skin colour, with
people with “white” skin typically in the dominant position on the hierarchy, and people whose
skin colour is variously described as “yellow”, “red”, “brown”, “black” or “coloured”, lower on the
hierarchy, although their exact relationship to each other along the hierarchy may vary from
culture to culture. Historically, however, other perceived “genetic” factors besides skin colour have
been used to justify a racial hierarchy, such as in the case of Jews. On a national scale, racial
hierarchies also exist, with superiority of one group over another based on skin colour (lighter is
usually considered better), tribe, ethnic group, etc. Many atrocities have been perpetrated globally,
and within nations, on the basis of race.

Over the years, various attempts have been made to measure racial differences to justify the
supremacy of a particular race, and the rank order of the other races. This has included measure-
ment of head circumference; brain size; IQ scores; muscle mass and density; reproductive rates;
and a host of other measures (Rushton, 1991, 1992; Weber, 1992). Belief in the inferiority of races
other than “white” historically has resulted in the denying of personhood, colonialization and
whole-scale destruction of indigenous societies, and wide-spread discrimination, exclusion,
persecution, elimination and other human rights violations on the basis of “colour” or other
“genetic” differences perceived to be linked to race (Weitz, 2003). Similar beliefs with respect to
particular ethnic or tribal groups have had similar effects within nations, such as evidenced by
atrocities such as the genocides in Armenia (1915-1918) (Smith, Markusen, & Lifton, 1995),
Germany (1941-1945), Cambodia (1975-1979), Rwanda (1994) (Human Rights Watch, 2006)
and Bosnia (1992-1995) (Trahan, 2006), to name just a few.

Long-standing historical discrimination on the basis of race has left many peoples socially,
economically, and politically disadvantaged relative to the dominant racial group within their
society. It has resulted in extreme inequalities with respect to health, education, employment,
income, political power, and other social disadvantage (O'Neil & Piron, 2003: 12-13). The black
civil rights movement in the USA, work to dismantle Apartheid in South Africa, and Indigenous
Peoples’ quest for self-governance and settlement of land claims are all examples of rights-based
movements to redress this historical discrimination.

There is debate today about whether race is actually biological — that many differences iden-
tified as “racial” are, in fact, the product of long-standing discrimination, genetic differences that
have emerged within a small gene pool, and/or similar environmental conditions (Bamshad &
Olson, 2003). Regardless, genetic predispositions to certain health conditions, or genetic differ-
ences in the metabolism of food, drugs etc. that are present in certain “racial” or “ethnic” popu-
lations, all need to be taken into account when dealing with the health of people. So too do the
varying social conditions of people from “racial” or “ethnic” populations, especially when social
disadvantages that negatively affect health are present.

Scholars who treat race as only biologically grounded rather than also socially constructed are
criticized for practising race essentialism. Race essentialism exaggerates the differences between
people of colour and whites, and fails to see both the internal variations among people of colour
and whites as well as the commonalities between both groups (Jhappan, 1996: 17).

There are different meanings associated with the term “essentialism" in recent social science
and cultural studies. “Theories are typically branded as essentialist when they claim that these

social distinctions [of gender, race and sexual orientation] have deeply rooted biological under-
Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

pinnings, that they are historically invariant and culturally universal, or that their boundaries are
sharp and not susceptible to sociocultural shaping” (Haslam, Rothschild, & Ernst, 2000: 114).

This focus on anti-essentialism has led to a specific quandary: is race still a meaningful category
for scholarly analysis and political activity? This is parallel to the debate about whether it is still
meaningful to use “woman” as an analytical category — and for the same reasons. Dei (2000)
argues convincingly for the importance of recognizing race and race differences, and indeed asserts
the salience of race, which he presents as a socially constructed category, stripped of all biological,
inherent, and unchanging aspects.!°

The tripartite BIAS FREE approach recognizes race as one of the bases on which social hierarchies
are constructed. It also recognizes membership in dominant or non-dominant racial groups as socially
relevant and in need of examination as an analytical variable. Finally, it recognizes that all people have
equal entitlements to rights, equality, justice, health, dignity and respect, regardless of their race,
and that to achieve equality with dominant racial groups, members of non-dominant racial groups
may sometimes require different treatment to minimize the hierarchy, and at other times, the same
treatment to resolve double standards. It also recognizes, that in relation to health, different treatment

may be required in response to any differences in genetic, biological or social factors.

Ability hierarchy

The ability hierarchy has been constructed on the basis of a medical model of disability, in which
people are assigned an order on the hierarchy on the basis of their biological structures and func-
tioning in relation to species-typical normative structures and functioning. The focus is on abnor-
mality, deficits and decrements in functioning (Ustiin 2006). Position on the hierarchy is assigned

in relation to measurable differences from the norm.

The ‘medical model’ of disability invokes a ‘common-sense’ definition of
disability. Under this model, disability involves an observable deviation from
biomedical norms and focuses on the abnormality of the body. People with
disabilities are those who experience a significant level of physical, sensory or
mental incapacity, which affects their life experience. Disability is conflated with
impairment and incapacity, and is seen as an individual deficit. Medicine and
rehabilitation are mobilised to overcome the consequences of impairment and
to provide a basis for identifying those in need of support. Within the context
of the modern welfare state, social security schemes may be introduced to
compensate for the economic cost associated with impairment. The attitude to
people with disabilities is, on this model, essentially paternalistic. lt embodies
the assumption that people with disabilities are in need of charity and care.
Disability is conceptualised as an individual tragedy, and pity and concern are
invoked. The consequence of viewing disability in this way is that people with
disabilities are treated as outsiders. Adopting a negative view of disability, and
people with disabilities, legitimises strategies such as relegating people with
disabilities to institutions; sterilising them for eugenic purposes; or denying
them citizenship rights. Such actions are considered to be appropriate
responses to the social problems arising out of disability (Jones & Basser
Marks, 2001: 8476).

 

10 Dei, like Jhappan and others, ends up utilizing the concept of “strategic essentialism” — a term first coined by Spivak
(Spivak, 1996). It seems that Dei’s term of “race salience” achieves the same without the confusing use of the term “es-
sentialism” in both a negative and positive sense.
Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework

17

 

Within the anti-ableist literature, there is much criticism of the biomedical model of
disability and the prescribed solution to fix individuals so that they can appear, behave and/or
function in a manner that approaches the dominant norm as much as possible. In response to
the biomedical model, a social model of disability emerged as people claimed their entitlement
to be equal members of society. The social model values the diversity of bodily structures and
functioning and situates the source of disadvantage not in the individual, but in the environ-
ment and in social, political and cultural practices that disempower them and create barriers
to their inclusion and full participation in society. “The social model rejects the individual
deficit understanding of disability, which is exposed as a form of biological determinism, and
disputes assumptions about the ‘inherent inferiority’ of people with disabilities as the cause of
subordinate social status” (Jones & Basser Marks, 2001: 8477). From the perspective of this
model, the solution is not the “cure” of the individual by doctors and rehabilitation specialists,
but the “cure” by policy-makers of disabling and exclusionary policies, programmes and
practices.

Within the literature, some disability rights activists have been criticized for omission of the
body and the reality of the personal experience of impairment, pain and limitation. As Shakespeare
and Watson (1996) argue, quoting Morris (1991), “We can insist that society disables us by its
prejudice and by its failures to meet the needs created by disability, but to deny the personal
experience of disability is, in the end, to collude in our own oppression.” The denial of the personal
experience of impairment is, the authors argue, a form of social or cultural essentialism. Within
the disability movement, this essentialism is a point of tension. It is epitomized in the lack of
clarity, the conceptual confusion and the failure to come up with consistent concepts to define
disability itself.

Increasingly, there is movement towards a human rights model of disability!'. Recognition
of disabled peoples’ entitlement to equality, dignity and social inclusion has gained widespread
acceptance beyond the disability movement, and is the subject of an international convention

on the human rights of disabled peoples agreed upon at the United Nations on 27 August 2006.

The human rights model starts from the point of view of the universal entitle-
ment of all people to rights, equality and justice. People with disabilities, like
all other people, are entitled to have their rights recognised and to be treated
with dignity and respect. An inclusive theory of human rights takes the celebra-
tion of diversity and difference to be fundamental, and equality to relate to both
the process itself and the outcome of that process. An inclusive human rights
model does not accept formal equality as an appropriate standard nor does
it accept that equalisation of opportunity will result in inclusion. People with
disabilities can only have their human rights respected when society makes
accommodations for difference not just when asked to do so but at every step
along the way. This model does not elevate people with disabilities to a special
status nor require that the primary identity of the person be that of a person
with a disability. Rather, the human rights model proposes a fluidity of treat-
ment and a flexibility in policy and practice. The needs of all people are to be
equally acknowledged and respected such that accommodations will be made
independent of status of the person (Jones & Basser Marks, 2001: 8477).

 

'1 For a discussion of models of disability see (Barnes, 1996; Jones & Basser Marks, 2001; Oliver, 1996; Rioux, 2003).
Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

In keeping with this rights-based approach, the BIAS FREE Framework calls the ability hier-
archy into question. It challenges the systems, structures and practices that have contributed to

the discrimination, marginalization and exclusion of disabled people (Bach & Burke, 2002).

Benefits of an integrative approach to social hierarchies
Using an integrative approach to explore the nature of biases that derive from social hierarchies
helps to identify some of the areas where existing anti-sexist, anti-racist and anti-ableist scholarly

work have run into difficulty.

Exploring common roots of domination and social inequality

Bringing each of the hierarchies into a common framework has helped to shed light on common
roots of domination and social inequality. A common manifestation of all hierarchies is a tendency
to locate “the problem” in the individual and to construct non-dominant groups as pathologically
different from the dominant group.

Rather than locating problems within the individual, the BIAS FREE Framework recognizes
the hierarchy as problematic while, at the same time, acknowledging that personal experience is
important — but without pathologizing it. The framework calls attention to the need at times to
treat people differently to accommodate their differences and at other times to treat them the same

to avoid double standards.

Correctly identifying the problem and needed solution

What happens if we fail to deal both with differences and similarities simultaneously? Typically
we end up substituting one problem with another, or compounding the original problem. For
example, to be eligible for disability benefits in the Province of Ontario, in Canada, disabled
people must demonstrate that they meet certain criteria. In a recent study, one person recounted:
"They said to my daughter, does she cook? And she said she has her own kitchen. And they said, if she
can use her kitchen she doesn't need a scooter."

The authors of the report comment: “Because of her abilities in one area, she was ineligible
for assistance to obtain the mobility device she needed so that she could participate in others"
(Frazee et al., 2002: 77). In this instance the rigid set of eligibility criteria resulted in the disabled
person being denied the support she needed for social participation. This is evidently a case of
muddied thinking, lack of knowledge and failure of professional competence and judgement on
the part of the persons making the assessment for supports and/or setting the eligibility criteria.
Moreover, failing to consider and accommodate the needs of the disabled woman reinforces
the social hierarchy and perpetuates social disadvantage and inequity for the woman. When this
happens in a systemic way, such as in the case of system-wide eligibility criteria that are used over
and over to deny people their right to accommodation, it is, very clearly, an example of a social

hierarchy at work.

Examining both social and biological differences in a non-hierarchical manner
So far, we have looked at the gender, race and ability hierarchies, all of which are social construc-
tions. However, there are also biological differences that must be acknowledged, particularly in
health research. The current emphasis in the literature on embodied knowledge (Tomlinson, 1999)
helps to re-introduce such differences in a non-hierarchical manner. The body has been called an
“absent presence” (Schilling, 2003), of which we become aware consciously either through a process
of reflexivity or because the normativity of a two-handed, two-legged etc. body is disrupted.

In other words, all knowledge is mediated through the body, whether the body meets norma-
tive standards or not. Acknowledging this helps to accept the diversity of body shapes and forms.

‘

As Lupton notes: “... claims which deny the biological characteristics of lived bodies may prove
to be self-defeating if it means that women who are pregnant, undergoing in vitro fertilization,

childbirth, breast-feeding or abortion, taking hormonal contraception, subjected to female circum-
Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework

 

cision, experiencing premenstrual syndrome, menstruation or menopausal symptoms are denied
acknowledgement of the sheer physicality and inevitable social consequences of these uniquely
female physiological experiences, some of which, like menstruation, pregnancy and childbirth, are
universal across cultures” (Lupton, 1994: 25).

With respect to race, there are also some biological aspects that need to be taken into account
in health research, such as genetic conditions (e.g. sickle-cell anaemia (Tapper, 1999)) that are
more prevalent among specific racial or ethnic populations. On the one hand, they may require
focused research on a particular condition; on the other, they may need to be taken into consid-
eration in research that is not specific to these conditions, but where their presence may have a
differential effect on results.

Biological differences are also relevant for people with non-normative body compositions,
health conditions or impairments. For example, recent research has found that people with Down
Syndrome have some protective factors against cancer (Hasle, Clemmensen, & Mikkelsen, 2000).
Research to understand these factors could have benefits for others as well; but, this knowledge
gives rise to serious ethical concerns that must be taken into consideration in the conduct

of research.

Understanding intersections and compounding effects of biases

As already indicated, everyone experiences stratification in more than one social hierarchy.
One may be disabled, male and white, or female and black with a normative body and mind, for
example. To this, the many other hierarchies that are at present not considered such as sexual
orientation, age, class, caste, religion, geographical location and so on can be added. Indeed, none
of these statuses is ever experienced in isolation; each is mediated through the others.

The effects of being positioned in more than one hierarchy may not simply be additive, but
may sometimes multiply. We therefore need to acknowledge and deal with the intersecting and
cumulative nature of the inequalities stemming from various hierarchies. This requires a system-
atic, multidimensional analysis of the various biases and the forms they may take. An integrative
approach facilitates this.

In research, the more dimensions that are added, the bigger the sample required. One cannot
ever cover all hierarchies in every research study. The key is to acknowledge this in the study,
identify which hierarchies are relevant within a given context, clarify which hierarchies will be

addressed, and provide reasons for excluding the others.

Probing the nature of the problem

The BIAS FREE Framework builds from the three interconnected types of problems identified
above. It provides a comprehensive set of diagnostic questions that will alert us to the presence of
biases that derive from any form of social hierarchy. Questions are provided for each of the three
main problem types. Further questions in the framework probe deeper to look at the nature of the
problems. These questions allow us to recognize and to find solutions for all forms of biases
derived from social hierarchies, not just one form. The various problems overlap but nevertheless
have distinct characteristics.

It does not suffice to simply transfer questions derived from recognizing gender bias to, for
instance, racist biases. One needs to take into account what forms racist biases take and how they
differ from gender biases. Likewise, ableism presents its own unique problems. We have dealt
with this issue by going back and forth between the three hierarchies in the formulation of theo-
retical questions that alert us to the presence of biases, and in the formulation of the solutions.
Using the abstract terms “dominant” and “non-dominant” groups to refer to position on a social
hierarchy, rather than names of groups specific to a particular hierarchy, e.g. men/women, non-
disabled/disabled, allows shifting the focus back and forth to look at hierarchies that are organized
along different axes (e.g. gender and race) as well as hierarchies that exist within a particular

hierarchy.
20

Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

Recognizing hierarchies within a hierarchy

Finally, there are hierarchies within each of the hierarchies. For instance, in the gender hierarchy,
globally men are the dominant group (have a higher position in the hierarchy as evidenced by their
ability to yield more power and accrue more resources than women); but among men, there is also
a clear global order, with white males from high-income countries typically being dominant over
non-white males from low-income countries (as evidenced by the preponderance of white males
in positions of power, wealth, access to resources like health, education, control over decision-
making affecting global issues, and the relative social disadvantage of the majority of the world’s
non-white males, relative to white males, despite non-whites accounting for five-sixths of the
world’s population of men). Likewise, within a particular society, some groups of men will be
dominant over others; while this may vary from country to country, ordering may be done on the
basis of any number of hierarchies, for example, sexual orientation, number of wives, religion,
tribal status, caste, etc.

While males are more dominant than females on the gender hierarchy, both are more domi-
nant than people who do not fall within the normative definition of male or female. People who
fit neither standard conceptions of male and female, nor ascribed gender roles, experience discrim-
ination and social disadvantage in most societies, although there have been exceptions in some cul-
tures. Among the Aboriginal Peoples of North America, for example, homosexuals and
transvestites were assigned an honoured position within their community as shamans or healers
(Trewartha, 1989).

Within the disability hierarchy, people with physical impairments are more dominant than

people with psychosocial impairments (Deal, 2003), and experience less stigma and discrimination.

Types of applications

The major questions and sub-questions in the BIAS FREE Framework alert us to the presence of
bias deriving from any social hierarchy and can be applied at any and all stages of the research
process. The Framework also can be used to identify biases in legislation, policy, programmes,
service delivery and practice; but these applications are not dealt with in this book. Each of these
processes has a number of elements or stages, some of which overlap. Not all elements are always
present in every research activity. For example, some types of research may not clearly distinguish
between the research question, design and methods. Others may not have an abstract, a summary
or policy recommendations. Some may not proceed on the basis of funded research proposals or
calls for proposals. Qualitative research projects sometimes may not present hypotheses or use
specific measurement instruments. The set of research elements listed below is not exhaustive —
it is for illustrative purposes only. The list can be adapted as needed. The first list reflects elements
of conducting research (Sage, 2005); the second list reflects elements of funding, managing and
administering research programmes. For the purposes of this book, examples that illustrate appli-

cations of the Framework are limited to the various elements of conducting research.

Elements of conducting research:
¢ Research proposal
e Literature review

¢ Research question and design

- Study purpose and rationale

- Hypothesis

- Description of population to be studied and inclusion and exclusion criteria
¢ Concepts
¢ Theoretical framework

¢ Research methods
- Description of methods
- Measures and measurement instruments
- Recruitment of participants
Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework

21

 

¢ Data analysis and interpretation
* Conclusions
* Policy recommendations

* Communication of results
- Title
- Abstract/Executive summary
- Literature review
- Language
- Analysis and discussion
- Conclusions
- Visual representations

Elements of funding, managing, and administering research programmes:
¢ Priority-setting
* Research protocols, including topics, nature of methods, staffing criteria, etc.
¢ Funding criteria
* Call for proposals
¢ Ethical guidelines
¢ Evaluation of proposals
* Guidelines for dissemination of results
¢ Evaluation of final product

¢ Communication strategy

Three-dimensional matrix
The BIAS FREE Framework has been designed as a three-dimensional matrix that uses a set of
19 diagnostic questions for exploring whether biases that derive from various social hierarchies are
present in various elements of the research process, and a set of solutions for removing all biases
uncovered during application of the Framework. The three dimensions of the matrix are:
1. Type of hierarchy (race, gender, ability, etc.);
2. Specific element of the process being examined (research proposal, literature review,
methods, analysis, etc.); and
3. Theoretical questions that alert us to the presence of specific bias problems and to the
appropriate solutions to remove the bias and resulting inequity.

Typically, when retrospectively reviewing published research, one would begin by identifying
which hierarchy is at work, the main problem type and specific nature of the problem, and then
whether the bias is at the level of a concept, the formulation of the research question and/or
another element of the research process. When planning or conducting research, one begins with
whichever research element best fits the current stage of the research process, and then proceeds
as above.

A three-page version of the matrix for research applications is in the foldout pages at the back
of this book. The questions and solutions from the framework follow below, and then we consider

their application.
22

Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

The BIAS FREE Framework

H - Maintaining an existing hierarchy
Question: —_ Is dominance of one group over the other in any way justified or maintained?

Solution: Situate the problem within a human rights framework, in which equality is an
underlying value. Point out the discrepancy between this value and the inequalities

among groups of people that result from the hierarchy.

H 17 Denial of hierarchy

Question: _Is the existence of a hierarchy denied in spite of widespread evidence to the contrary?
Solution: The existence of a hierarchy is acknowledged: its validation is questioned and
rejected.

H2 Maintenance of hierarchy

Question: — Are practices or views that are premised on a hierarchy presented as normal or unpro-
blematic?
Solution: Expressions of hierarchies are questioned and problematized.

H3 Dominant perspective
Question: _ Is the perspective or standpoint of the dominant group adopted?

Solution: The perspectives of non-dominant groups are respected and accepted.

H4 Pathologization

Question: Is the non-dominant group pathologized when it differs from the norms derived from

the dominant group?

Solution: Challenge the norm and address the reasons given for pathologizing the group.

H5 Objectification

Question: _ Is stripping people of thetr intrinstc dignity and personhood presented as normal or

unproblematic?

Solution: Recognize that every human has intrinsic dignity and human rights that are invio-

lable and must be protected, and conduct the research accordingly.

H6 Victim-blaming
Question: — Are victims of individual andlor structural violence blamed and held accountable?

Solution: Victims are not blamed; individual and/or structural violence is identified; and

those responsible are held accountable.

H7 Appropriation

Question: —_ Is ownership claimed by the dominant group for entities that originate(d) in or belong

to the non dominant group?

Solution: Original ownership is acknowledged and respected.
Chapter 2 The BIAS FREE Framework

23

 

F - Failing to examine differences

Question: Is membership in a non dominant! dominant group examined as socially relevant and
accommodated?
Solution: Establish the relevance of group membership within a given context. Once rele-

vance is established, accommodate differences in ways that reduce the hierarchy.

F 1 Insensitivity to difference
Question: Has the relevance of membership in dominant/non-dominant group been ignored?

Solution: Relevance of dominant/non-dominant group membership must always be deter-
mined; group membership must be included as an analytical variable throughout

the activity and only then can its relevance be assessed.

F2 Decontextualization

Question: — Has the different social reality of dominant and non-dominant groups explicitly been

considered?

Solution: The context with respect to dominant/non-dominant group membership is expli-
citly examined and differences following from this are identified, analysed and

taken into account.

F3 Overgeneralization or universalization

Question: Is information derived from dominant groups generalized to non-dominant groups

without examining if it is applicable to the non-dominant groups?

Solution: Information about the dominant group is acknowledged as such and efforts are
made to obtain information about the non-dominant group, or conclusions are

limited to the dominant group.

F4 Assumed homogeneity
Question: Is the dominant or non dominant group treated as a uniform group?

Solution: Differences within dominant and non-dominant groups are acknowledged and

taken into account.

D - Using double standards
Question: — Are non dominant/dominant groups dealt with differently?

Solution: Identify the double standard that leads to different treatment of members of
dominant and non-dominant groups and how this maintains a hierarchy; then,

devise means to provide the same treatment to both groups.

D1 Overt double standard
Question: Are non dominant and dominant groups treated differently?

Solution: Provide the same treatment to members of dominant and non-dominant groups

whenever this increases equity.

D2 Under representation or exclusion
Question: Are non dominant groups under represented or excluded?

Solution: Non-dominant groups are included whenever relevant.
24

Chapter 2. The BIAS FREE Framework

 

D3 Exceptional under-representation or exclusion

Question: In contexts normally associated with non-dominant groups, but pertinent to all groups,

is the dominant group under represented or excluded?

Solution: Dominant groups are appropriately represented in issues of relevance to them that

have been stereotyped as being important only for a non-dominant group.

D4 Denying agency

Question: _Is there a failure to consider non dominant/dominant groups as both actors and acted
upon?
Solution: Examine ways in which dominant and non-dominant groups are both acting as

well as acted upon.

D5 Treating dominant opinions as fact

Question: — Are opinions expressed by a dominant group about a non dominant group treated
as fact?
Solution: Opinions expressed by dominant groups about non-dominant groups are treated

as opinions, not fact.

D6 Stereotyping

Question: Are stereotypes of non dominant/dominant groups treated as essential aspects of group
membership?
Solution: Treat stereotypes as stereotypes, not as truths.

D7 Exaggerating differences

Question: — Are overlapping traits treated as if they were characteristic of only non dominant/

dominant groups?

Solution: Document both the differences and the similarities between members of

non-dominant and dominant groups.

D8 Hidden double standard

Question: — Are different criteria used to define comparable facts with the effect of hiding their
comparability?

Solution: Ask whether there might be a hidden double standard by looking for non-obvious

parallels. One way of achieving this is by asking what form the phenomenon

identified within one group might take within another group.
 

Iii Applying the
BIAS FREE Framework to research
for health

Applicable at any stage of the research process

There is no single best entry point when applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research. When
we are dealing with our own research or research about which we have some control (e.g. the
evaluation of a research proposal), we can use the Framework to identify and rectify problems
before we get too far into the research. When we are dealing with research reports of projects
already completed (e.g. publications), applying the Framework will alert us to the existence of a
problem, thus alerting us to use caution in how we use such reports.

A particular research study may have several problems that manifest in different phases of the
study. For an example, let us consider the Aspirin study cited earlier. The research methods were
gender insensitive in that they failed to examine and account for differences between the sexes
(F 1), the conclusions were over-generalized (F 3) from men to women, and the whole was derived
from a male perspective (dominant perspective) (H 3) that contributed to ignorance about or
indifference to the possible biological differences in response to a drug between men and women.
Depending on where we start our analysis, different questions will guide us to the recognition of
a problem. In other words, there is more than one way to approach the issue and sometimes more
than one correct answer. The issue is, therefore, not to find “the” correct answer to a problem but
to recognize that there is a problem and to deal with it appropriately.

Research into a particular health problem may point to the existence of biases not in the
research process itself, but in legislation, policies, programmes, services or practices. Again, the
important thing is to be able to pinpoint and name the problem. Addressing it may be beyond
the scope of the research, but the research could point to a needed response at the level at which
the bias occurs.

The BIAS FREE Framework lists the theoretical questions we can ask of research by
type of problem. However, when applying the Framework to research, one is more likely to
proceed by research element rather than problem type, beginning with the research element
applicable to the particular stage of a research project under way. Are researchers engaging
in a literature review? In formulating the research design? In analysing data? Obviously, a
different set of solutions to the problems that have been identified is possible and needed,
depending on the specific element of the research process in which one is engaged. Selected
examples using the questions posed in the BIAS FREE Framework are presented below,
arranged according to the various elements of the research process. Examples are drawn from
social hierarchies based on gender, race and disability, and occasionally from other hierarchies,
to demonstrate the applicability of the questions within these differing contexts. Each of the
identified problems is followed by a solution. The numerical designations of the questions in
each of the examples below refer to the questions in the BIAS FREE Framework by their

name and problem type.

 
26

Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

 

Gender
Race
Ability

Gender

Gender
Ability
Race

Examples of the application of the BIAS FREE Framework
to selected research elements

Research proposal

Ensuring that bias does not creep into the research proposal itself is the first step to ensuring that
research remains free of bias. A proposal is usually required when researchers apply for funding,
although not all research projects require a formal proposal — for instance, if the research is
unfunded. Whether or not a formal proposal is required, every piece of research begins with a
hypothesis or question and a proposed course of action to investigate it. Calls for proposals can
make it clear that proposals will be evaluated, among other things, on the basis of how well they
include and pay attention to groups that are often excluded in research on a specific topic. This
includes, for example, women in stress research (D 2), disabled people in almost any topic not
specifically related to them (D 2), men in research on reproductive health (D 3), or race in studies
that look at inequities in or financing of health research.

Researchers will need to demonstrate that they have contextualized the research for each of the
groups studied by taking their circumstances into account in the formulation of questions (F 2),
and that their analysis will likewise assess the relevance of membership in dominant/non-dominant
groups and include it as an analytical variable. Promising projects that fail to do all these things
can sometimes be remedied by drawing the attention of the researchers to these issues. While bias
can also enter into research proposals in other ways, such as the inclusion/exclusion criteria for the
population to be studied, the proposed sampling process, methodology and choice of research
instruments, and in the data analysis, participant recruitment and communication and dissemi-
nation plans, they are addressed below as separate elements of the research process. Problems that
may occur within a research proposal and within the research design that follow acceptance of a

proposal are obviously closely connected — the major difference is in the time dimension.

Literature review

Research projects typically include a literature review as a first step. It is usually on the basis of such
a review that decisions are made about whether or not to conduct a new study, how to design the
study, and so on. Therefore, whenever a phenomenon under consideration affects both dominant
and non-dominant groups within a given hierarchy, it is imperative to examine to what degree the

literature deals with this fairly.

Literature reviews of specific articles or books involve — among other things — an assessment of whe-
ther or not they are free of bias. As such, it is necessary to ask the bias questions in reading and assessing
any individual piece of literature. However, it is also necessary when conducting literature reviews
to assess not only the adequacy of individual documents, but also the overall mix of documents. For
instance, there is nothing wrong with single-sex studies as long as they clearly specify that they include
only one sex. However, when the research is dealing with an issue that is relevant to both sexes — for
example, heart disease — and study after study deals only with men, there is clearly a gender bias.

A good literature review, therefore, will consider not only whether individual studies do or do
not have bias problems, but will also pay attention to and evaluate the overall mix. Literature reviews
must therefore deal with what is available as well as what is missing within the field(s) surveyed. All
three overriding questions need to be asked of the literature: Is dominance of one group over another
in any way justified or maintained? Is membership in non-dominant/dominant groups examined
as socially relevant and accommodated? Are non-dominant/dominant groups dealt with differently?
If any or all of these problems are present, this needs to be explicitly pointed out. The identification

of such problems provides an excellent jumping-off point for new research projects.

For instance, most studies in stress research include male subjects only (Taylor et al., 2000). This
is under-representation or exclusion (D2) in the research design. When the results are then

over-generalized to women without examining whether they are applicable, we encounter a
Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

27

 

different problem at the level of interpretation (over-generalization or universalization, F 3).
If, when conducting the literature review, we keep asking ourselves whether the perspective of the
dominant group (in this instance, males) is adopted, we would note that women have been largely
omitted in this field of study. Exactly the same observation applies to the representation of disabled
people and people of colour in many fields of research.

Accepting the findings as applicable to non-dominant groups without sufficient empirical
evidence may lead to false conclusions and an inappropriate response to the group(s) excluded
from the study. The solution is to note explicitly the imbalance in the literature, assume that,
in the absence of empirical evidence, results are not transferable to the groups that have been

excluded, and note the need for further research involving the excluded group(s).

Research question and design

The research question is the precise articulation of what one wishes to investigate. It often involves
specifying the hypotheses (predictions about potential relationships and observations), and more
broadly the overall question that the research process seeks to address. It is typically at this stage
of the research process that the study purpose and rationale; and where applicable, the hypothesis
and the description of the population to be studied; and the inclusion and exclusion criteria are
articulated.

The term research design describes the overall approach to answering the research question and
is most commonly used in the social sciences and natural sciences. While the terms “research
question” and “research design” may not be used in the humanities, nevertheless, any research
study will have a central guiding question and an overall plan of how to answer this question.

When retrospectively examining the research question and design in a completed project, all
that can be done is to critique it if problems are present and to hope that this will lead to an avoi-
dance of such problems in the next project. However, in prospectively planning or in conducting
research, bias problems can be avoided. In the following, we provide some examples of problems
and how they can be addressed in the overall approach to addressing the research question, and

identifying the method(s) to be used in conducting the investigation and analysing the data.

If the study includes people who are located in different hierarchies, the existence of such a
hierarchy needs to be acknowledged in the research design. A very basic way of maintaining a
hierarchy is denying its very existence. Henry et al. call this problem “the discourse of denial”, i.e.
the refusal to accept the reality of racism [and ableism and sexism] despite ample evidence to the
contrary (H_ 1) (Henry et al., 2000: 26). The effect of such denials is to reinforce the hierarchy,
since what is not accepted as existing cannot be effectively addressed.

Health issues of non-dominant groups, even in wealthy countries, typically get short
shrift when it comes to expenditures on health research. For example, “[i]n a 1994 report,
the Medical Research Council's Advisory Committee on Women's Health Research Issues
estimated that only 5% of the Council's research funds went specifically to women's health issues.
Exclusion of women from research results in problems of validity and important data gaps”

(Health Canada, 1999: 15).

According to the World Health Organization, Saltman has argued, “One of the ways in which the
existing health care system discriminates against women is in its focus on mortality: women’s
major health needs lie in improving morbidity rather than mortality” (World Health Organiz-
ation 2000: 13).

By asking, “is the perspective or standpoint of the dominant group adopted?” (H3) it becomes
clear that the research problem is, in this instance, defined from a male perspective. Women’s life
expectancy is longer than men’s in most countries, but women experience higher morbidity.
To deal adequately with women’s health issues, some attention needs to be shifted from mortality

to morbidity.

Race
Ability
Gender

Gender
28

Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

 

Gender
Ability

Gender

Gender

Race

The World Health Organization comments on the link between reproductive functions and

psychiatric syndromes as follows:

It seems astonishing that issues such as forced sterilization, having one [sic]
concerns dismissed or trivialized, not being asked for consent to invasive pro-
cedures or tests, being denied privacy or dignity when intimate gynaecological
examinations are performed, having low or no access to accurate health infor-
mation or to safe, effective and affordable methods of fertility regulation, safe
care in pregnancy and childbirth and affordable means of preventing or effecti-
vely treating sexually transmitted diseases have never been seen to play a role
in women’s emotional well being. Inadequate reproductive health care and the
violation of reproductive rights result in physical harm even death. Despite this,
their psychological dimensions have been ignored, almost as if women’s bodies
and what is done to them had no effect on their minds and could be denied
(World Health Organization, 2000: 25).

This makes a compelling argument that the research in this area is decontextualized (F 2) in
the very way in which the research question is posed. On the other hand, by restricting themselves
to commenting only on mental health consequences for women, the authors take the structural
problems they enumerate as given, pathologizing women rather than the systems and structures
(H 4). A more far-reaching approach would be to identify where concerted efforts could lead to

a change in the structural factors that affect both the physical and mental health of women.

There is much evidence that the gender hierarchy leads to serious problems in the design of studies,
e.g., failing to take sex and gender into account (F1), excluding women from malaria research
(D 2) (Heggenhougen et al., 2003; World Health Organization - Dept. of Gender Women and
Health, 2004b). Similarly, we know that many illnesses — including tuberculosis (World Health
Organization — Dept. of Gender Women and Health, 2004c), lung cancer and smoking (World
Health Organization — Dept. of Gender Women and Health, 2004a), mental health problems
(World Health Organization — Dept. of Gender Women and Health, 2004b) and others —
manifest differently in females and males, and require different prevention, treatment and care
strategies, all of which must be taken into consideration when designing and conducting

related research.

Looking at the opposite — the exclusion of men from research (D 3) — female contraceptives
have been researched, produced and used for a long time, while male contraception is still in its
infancy. A history of the World Health Organization task force on male contraception reveals
how a number of factors coalesced to slow down the development of male contraceptives:
companies did not see enough profit potential to assist in the development of drugs for sperm
suppression in normal men. Also, gynaecologists and urologists “exercised a stranglehold on the
treatment of male infertility and most appeared reluctant to support the development of methods
for regulation of male fertility”, overall funding was limited, and medical graduates were reluctant

to enter the new field of andrology, among other factors (Waites, 2003: 12).

Bias stemming from the race hierarchy has been shown to have a profound effect on how the
research question and research design are formulated. Aboriginal peoples are often pathologized
(H 4). A Canadian team of researchers notes: "Notwithstanding four hundred years of policies and
practices of displacement and oppression, with the result that Aboriginal peoples exist at the
bottom ranks of Canadian society, this resolution of the state of affairs continues to focus on

Aboriginal people themselves" (Henry et al., 2000: 140).
Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

29

 

Similarly, Smith, a Maori researcher, remarks that colonialists invented the “indigenous
problem”. "The ‘indigenous problem‘ is a recurrent theme in all imperial and colonial attempts

to deal with indigenous peoples" (Smith, 1999: 90). She argues:

A continuing legacy of what has come to be taken for granted as a natural link
between the term “indigenous” (or its substitutes) and “problem” is that many
researchers, even those with the best of intentions, frame their research in
ways that assume that the locus of a particular research problem lies with the
indigenous individual or community rather than with other social or structural
issues. For example, researchers investigating poor health or educational
underachievement among indigenous communities often focus on the commu-
nity as the sole source of the problem and, because this is their focus, obviously
fail to analyze or make sense of the wider social, economic and policy contexts
in which communities exist. ... For many indigenous communities research
itself is taken to mean 'problem'; the word research is believed to mean, quite
literally, the continued construction of indigenous peoples as the problem
(Smith, 1999: 91-2).

The effect of this approach is a pathologization of Aboriginal people (H 4). The solution lies
in changing the research process so that research is designed and/or conducted by indigenous

communities themselves about issues that are relevant to their health.

With regard to the disability hierarchy, a common problem in research is that research questions are
typically framed to explore the effects of disability on education, income, employment, family status,
housing, etc. Thus, having a disabled child is reported to result in high parental unemployment,
family poverty and marriage break-up (UNICEE, 2005). However, when the questions are reframed
to explore the effects of non-inclusive employment and family support systems, for example, on
families with a disabled child, the failure of the system to adequately support the families becomes
apparent and an entirely different picture emerges. While the first set of questions situates the
problem in the child (H 4), the second calls into question the hierarchy that perpetuates disadvantage
vis-a-vis disability. The solution is to look at disability (and other similar disadvantages) as both

dependent and independent variables in the formulation of research questions.

Concepts

A concept usually indicates a general idea referring to a characteristic of an individual or group.
In the context of this book, it is important to recognize the difference between biased concepts
and biased language. In the case of concepts, we are not looking at the form of a word or sentence,
but at the implied meaning of a word or set of words. The bias is not at the level of language or
terminology; rather the bias is rooted in the definition of the concept itself.

Concepts cross-cut all the other elements of the research process and they may be biased in a
complex and subtle way. Also, biased concepts can lead to biases in the formulation of hypotheses,
research questions, design, analysis, conclusions, recommendations, etc. Identifying bias in concepts
is one of the hardest things to do, and often takes the collective work of many people over a long
period of time, such as in the case of “unpaid” work, referred to earlier. The solution is to use the
Framework to identify the bias and the specific nature of the problem; then, redefine the concept

to resolve the identified problem, ensuring that the new definition does not introduce a new bias.

One conceptual problem that often erroneously is seen as a language problem is the use of
supposedly generic male terms — "man", "mankind", "he" (to describe everyone) — for general

purposes. This is an instance of an overt double standard (D 1) — males and females are treated

Disability

Gender
30

Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

 

Gender

Gender

Race

differently in a way that maintains the hierarchy. The obvious solution to this problem is to use
truly generic terms such as "human", "humanity" and "they".

The opposite problem is the use of general terms in situations when only one sex is considered,
such as “the worker” or “voters” when dealing only with males. This is an instance of universali-
zation (F 3); the concept suggests that women are included when in fact they are not. The solution,
of course, is to use general terms only when the subject is, indeed, general.

The concept of work was cited above as an example of a hidden double standard (D 8). It is
the equation of work with paid work and hence the exclusion of unpaid work from the definition
of work that creates the bias, not the word itself. For a long time — and often still today —
women who did unpaid work at home were described as “not working”. It took the concerted
effort of many feminist scholars in many countries to establish the notion that work comes in two
forms: paid and unpaid — and that unpaid work is of very significant value, not only to individual
people and households but to the economy of a country. The estimates of the value of unpaid
housework vary greatly. A Canadian estimate pegs the replacement value at 41% of the GDP
(Chandler, 1994); using a different method of calculating value an Australian estimate pegs it at
98% of the GDP (Ironmonger, 1996). American estimates fluctuate between 30% and 60% of
the GDP (Folbre, 2001), and estimates from South Africa vary from a low of 11% of the GDP to
a high of 55% - depending on the method of calculating the value (Budlender & Brathaug, 2004).
It is clear that whatever the method used, unpaid housework is of enormous economic value.

The non-recognition of unpaid housework creates a host of problems. One consequence is that
unpaid housework is seen as unproductive and hence as irrelevant to national budgets (Waring,
1988b). This systematically hides the unpaid work that women perform within households. For
instance, when patients are discharged earlier from hospitals, this shows up as a cost saving in the
budget. However, the care that used to be delivered by trained personnel within the hospitals is
in such cases typically provided by women in the form of unpaid care work. The costs to women
in terms of their own health, and sometimes their capacity to earn money, remain invisible as
long as the work remains invisible (Bakker, 1998).

If we ask: “Are different criteria used to define comparable facts with the effect of hiding their
comparability?” (D 8) we realize that paid and unpaid work are both work. The obvious solution
is to recognize this and take it into account in research, and when setting budgets and devising

policies.

A different form of a hidden double standard occurs when a relationship is expressed from one
side only. For instance, the concept of polygyny (= plural wives) is descriptively accurate but deals
with the phenomenon only from the perspective of the man who has more than one wife (H 3).
From the perspective of the women, “husband-sharing” would be a more appropriate term. To be

inclusive, the solution would be to identify the phenomenon as plural wives/husband-sharing.

In the health field, a similar example is the international definition of fertility that expresses fertility
as the number of children born to a woman of childbearing age (D 3). This is an example of
exceptional exclusion of men; and correspondingly, we are much less well informed about male

fertility than female fertility.

Sometimes research looks at patients’ compliance with prescribed treatments. People in poor
countries are often identified as non-compliant with prescribed medical treatments. A detailed
case study of a young Haitian man who was labelled as “non-compliant” documented how he
and his family made heroic efforts to comply with the treatment but that lack of money — in spite
of the family having sold half of its land — distance from the medical center, coupled with ina-
dequate transportation to it, and other such structural factors made it impossible for him to com-
ply more fully (Farmer, 1997). This bias at the level of the concept of a “noncompliant patient”

is an example of victim-blaming (H 6) as well as pathologization (H 4).
Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

31

 

In occupational health studies, women and men with the same jo title may be assigned to different
tasks — a double standard (D 8) (Messing et al., 2004). Hence it is necessary to look at occupation
codes in more detail and to determine the specific aspects of a job rather than assuming that the

same titles correspond to the same tasks.

The concept of employability uses a non-disabled population as a normative reference point, thus
employing a dominant perspective (H 3). “People with disabilities may have to declare themselves
‘unemployable’ to get the support services, medications and devices they require” (Rocher Insti-
tute, 1996: 86). The solution would be to develop new concepts such as part-time employable

to serve the needs of some disabled people.

Theoretical frameworks

We adopt Warren's definition of a theoretical framework as "a socially constructed set of basic
beliefs, values, attitudes and assumptions that shapes and reflects how one views oneself and others.
It is oppressive when it explains, justifies, and maintains relationships of domination and subor-
dination.” Oppressive theoretical frameworks “are characterized not only by value dualisms and
hierarchies but also by 'power-over' conceptions of power and relationships of domination. ..and
a logic of domination ...." (Warren, 1993a: 257). Biases that come in at the level of the theoretical
framework have the potential to result in biases throughout the research process, as hypotheses,

research questions etc. all derive from the theoretical framework.

Smith notes that western academic researchers tend to theorize indigenous societies as:

. a phased progression from (1) initial discovery and contact, (2) population
decline, (3) acculturation, (4) assimilation, (5) 'reinvention' as a hybrid, ethnic
culture. While the terms may differ across various theoretical paradigms, the
historical descent into a state of nothingness and hopelessness has tended
to persist.

This formulation is an example of a dominant perspective (H 3). In contrast, indigenous

perspectives also show a phased progression, more likely to be articulated as:

(1) contact and invasion, (2) genocide and destruction, (3) resistance and survi-
val (4) recovery as indigenous peoples. The sense of hope and optimism is
a characteristic of contemporary indigenous politics which is often criticised,
by non-indigenous scholars, because it is viewed as being overly idealistic
(Smith, 1999: 87/8).

Erikson’s typology of human development, when applied to disabled people, relegates such people
permanently to lower stages of development, because the model assumes that a child must master

the most salient stages of the lower stage before moving on to the next stage. Gartner et al., drawing
on the work of Gliedman and Roth (1980) argue:

Thus, for example, the child’s mastery of bodily functions, which is central to
resolving the second stage’s issues of autonomy versus shame and doubt,
remains an open issue for the adult person with a disability who either lacks
bladder control or is dependent upon an attendant (or a family member). Thus,
‘there is an “infantile” quality to the way he /sic] must assert his mastery over
his body. Like the young child who must call on his mother /sic] for help, the

Gender

Disability

Race

Disability
32

Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

 

Sexual
Orientation
Race
Gender
Ability

Disability

physically handicapped person must sometimes relate to his own body by
means of another (able-bodied) person’...[In addition]...the typology does not
well address the great precocity that many persons with disabilities display in
their interpersonal behaviour (Gartner, Lipinsky, & Turnbull, 1991, footnote 5,
pp. 25-26).

This is another example of using a dominant perspective — the norms derived from the
dominant group are applied to the non-dominant group without questioning their relevance
(H 3). The effect of this is pathologization of the non-dominant group (H 4). Biases at this level
are extremely difficult to remove, as the dominant group has a stake in perpetuating its view of
the world. In many cases, all one can do is to point to the inherent bias and offer a different more
valuing framework as a new analytical paradigm, and demonstrate the differences that result when
a different paradigm is used. If people are genuinely interested in equity and social justice, demons-
trating, for example, how the original paradigm violates the human rights of the non-dominant

group may help to stimulate interest in moving towards a new paradigm.

Research methods and data-gathering

Research methods encompass the procedures used to answer research questions. Many factors
influence the choice of method(s). Primarily, the nature of the question being asked determines
which research techniques would be most appropriate. Surveys, experiments, secondary data
analysis, participant observation, in-depth interviews and focus groups are all examples of research
methods.

Data-gathering or collection refers to the procedures that have been developed for the study
(in-depth interviews, surveys, etc.) to collect information in a systematic way.

Research methods — like any other set of tools — can be used for various purposes. While
they themselves are neutral, they can, unfortunately, be used in a biased manner. Bias can
enter into research methods at many levels, including in data collection forms such as survey
questionnaires, measures and measurement instruments used, and type of analytical methodology,

recruitment of participants, etc.

Data collection forms
Intake forms in hospitals can be regarded as a form of research questionnaire. These forms will
usually be based on assumptions about family structure. Typically, forms require information
about the patients’ mother and father. This can result in problems for some people. For instance,
in Canada same-sex marriages are legal. When a same-sex couple has or adopts a child, children
may have two mothers or two fathers. The forms do not allow for this reality (F 1). Similarly, in
Aboriginal families, a tradition of “adoption — whereby children live with another female relative
(aunt or, grandmother) is common” (Stager, 2004: 22). Indeed, "custom adoptions” whereby a
grandparent or other close relative informally assumes responsibility for the upbringing of a child
are also legal in Canada. The lack of consideration of these types of families is an instance of
failure to take differences into account on the basis of sexual orientation and Aboriginal status
(F 1). Among children in care, disabled children are over-represented. In such cases, a guardian
would have to sign the form — another reality that the current forms do not accommodate (F 1).
The solution is simple: revise the forms by asking for Parent 1 and Parent 2. The intake person

can then identify each parent as mother, father, grandmother, guardian, aunt, etc.

Measures and instruments
The Disability Adjusted Life Year (DALY) is a statistical tool that combines in one measure the
time lived with illness and disability and the time lost due to premature mortality, based on the

assignment of numeric values and weights to different states of disability and ill-health. One
Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

33

 

DALY is defined as one lost year of “healthy” life. The burden of disease is defined as the gap
between current health status, as measured in DALYs, and an ideal situation where everyone
lives into old age free of disease and disability (World Health Organization). It is based on values
assigned to a measured degree of “functioning”, without considering — indeed expressly excludes
as being irrelevant — extraneous factors such as gender, and overall environments within which
people live.

When the health of disabled people and non-disabled people is measured using the DALY,
disabled people will nearly always score more poorly than non-disabled people. This is because
by definition, DALYs a) assume a “reduced value” of lives lived with a disability; b) use the term
disability interchangeably with ill-health; c) assume that living with a disability represents a
net drain on society; and d) assume that individuals with a disability suffer an existence that

lies somewhere between living and an anticipated premature death (H4) (Groce, Chamie,

& Me, 1999).

Methods

A particular statistical method called discriminant item analysis is used to simultaneously study
differences between two or more groups of objects with respect to several variables. It is a useful
technique when used appropriately. However, when used inappropriately it results in exaggerating
differences (D 7). An example would be a study that asks male and female subjects to agree or
disagree with a number of statements, subsequently eliminates all statements on which there was
no differentiation in responses by sex, and goes on to draw consequences with respect to all women
and men, based on the presentation of completely polarized results.

Adjusting scores on the basis of sex is justified if an effect that is being measured is a direct
effect of sex; but, if used incorrectly, it may hide differences in the situation of males and females.
For instance, a review of studies of carpal tunnel syndrome found that all the studies reviewed
adjusted for sex — without asking whether female workers were more likely than male workers
to engage in work that leads to this problem, which is in fact the case (Messing, 1998: 74 + ft. 1,
p. 208). This is an overt double standard (D 1) — different treatment when the same treatment
would be appropriate. However, the double standard is in effect quite well hidden, since few
people are likely to read the footnotes that alert readers that the scores had been adjusted.
This example illustrates that even overt double standards sometimes may be extremely difficult

to detect.

Unit of analysis

A similarly subtle problem occurs when there is a discrepancy between the unit of analysis and
an observation (F 1). Often, the family or the household is taken as the basic unit of analysis,
disregarding that typically households include people of different sexes and ages, with different
positions, needs, desires, etc. As previously mentioned, a study in northern Ethiopia found that women
are likely to spend more money on prevention of malaria than men in comparable households
(Lampieri et al., 1999). Taking only household income into account, when looking at consumption
preference, is misleading. We also need to know who is making the financial decisions.

Similar problems around the unit of analysis emerge when talking about care provision. As
patients are discharged from hospitals, they often require follow-up care, which is provided “by
the family’; however, given the global division of labour by sex, the people most likely to deliver
this care are women, not men — with sometimes significant consequences for the health and

well-being of women (F1).

This problem takes a different slant when women are discharged from hospital and in reality there
is no one other than themselves to provide the care (F2) (Seymour-Smith & Wetherell, 2006;
Shambley-Ebron & Boyle, 2006). Indeed, the women providing the care may be disabled them-

selves — a fact that often is not taken into account in research or policy (F 4).

Gender

Gender

Ability
34

Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

 

Gender
Race
Ability

Race

Race
Gender

Gender

Research participants

When identifying research participants — both those conducting the research and research sub-
jects — bias can be introduced. Assumed homogeneity (F 4) occurs when dominant or non-domi-
nant groups are treated as homogeneous groups when, in fact, they are constituted of diverse
people. The solution is to recognize the diverse make-up of such groups and give proper attention

to it. As noted, we are also likely to find hierarchies within the gender, race and ability hierarchies.

A comprehensive review of experimental psychology reports, spanning more than 75 years of
research, found: "Save a minuscule subset [of] ... experimental psychology reports, including over
90 percent of the research on race, indicate[d] no race of experimenter”. Instead: “The subjects’
racial status, skin color, degree of ‘white blood’, racial psychology, or attitudes eventually gained
primary consideration. In the end, the vast majority of race of experimenter studies have been
about the other, not the self of the investigator” (Morawski, 1997: 13/4). This is a very serious
methodological concern (F1). Essed has argued that interviewers of colour have privileged access
to information about racism experienced by people of colour. "Unlike many (White) social scien-
tists, I took their [women of colour] accounts of racism seriously and showed genuine interest
in the “ordinary” events of everyday life. This attitude allowed me to ask the interviewees to
qualify specific statements and to go into details without inducing defensive reactions from their
side. In other words, being an insider provided a rich base for tentative probing, which is valuable

in exploratory research" (Essed, 1991: 67).

The solution, of course, is very simple: control for and report the race (and sex and other relevant
characteristics) of all participants in the research process — from interviewers to subjects — and
reflect upon its significance. One difficulty, of course, is to get a good operational definition

of race.

Data analysis and interpretation
Data analysis and interpretations involve the sorting and summarizing of research findings.
Different techniques are used to analyse results, depending on the type of research. Some tech-
niques are designed to maximize insight into a data set, uncover underlying patterns in the data,
extract important variables, detect outliers and anomalies in the data, test underlying assumptions,
develop models and determine optimal factor settings. Data analysts may use any of these
approaches, or a mix of different approaches to their data, depending on the research methods
employed. For example, in field research, participant observation may involve classifying obser-
vations into categories, while in survey research it would involve computer-based sorting, conduc-
ting statistical analyses, summarizing, describing, and inferring from the data.

While the analytical techniques in and of themselves may not be biased, bias can enter into
analysis in a number of ways, for example in underlying assumptions about relationships, in the
selection of variables for analysis, in the focus on one set of variables over another, and in the

overall interpretation and presentation of results.
The following example from the gender hierarchy exemplifies why taking differences into account

in the analysis of research results is so important. Version A is adapted from a Finnish study

(Heiskanen et al., 1991), version B is our rewrite using the information supplied in that study.'*

12 For a longer version of this example, see (M. Eichler, 1997b).
Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

35

 

 

 

Version A: Understanding research on violence
without a BIAS FREE approach

About one person out of ten was the victim of a violent act or threat of violence during 1980.
In 1988, one person out of 12 was a victim. In 1980, almost half (46%) of the victims had a
least two such experiences; in 1988 the proportion of such victims was 45%. The victim in
both years was most likely a young single man.

The relative number of people who were victims of incidents that resulted in restricted
activity had also fallen between 1980-1988, but only slightly. The decreased number of
experiences of violence was most accentuated among the youngest men in the category of
street violence.

An exception from the overall decreasing trend was work-related violence. This had become
more common among women most active in the labour force (aged 20-44). Among men, the
number of such experiences had fallen.

In 1988, the incidence of family violence remained similar to figures for 1980.

Version B: Understanding research on violence
with a BIAS FREE approach

A comparison of women's and men's victimization

 

All forms of violence
Men Women
1980 58% 42%
1988 53% 47%

While men were slightly more likely to be victims of violence than were women, this difference
decreased between 1980 and 1988. In 1980, 58% of all victims were men and 42% were
women. In 1988, 53% were men and 47% were women. The typical male victim experienced
violence on the street. The typical female victim suffered violence from a family member in
her own home.

Both women and men experienced a relative decrease in small group violence and street vio-
lence and an increase in family and other violence. Although the proportion of violence that
was work-related almost doubled for women, the single most important category for women

remained family violence. This accounted for 27.5% of all violence experienced by women.

A comparison of the consequences of violence for women and men

 

All forms of violence
Men Women
1980 3.4% 3.6%
1988 2.7% 5.1%

The most telling indication of gender differences concerned the gravity of the consequences.
Between 1980 and 1988 the number as well as the proportion of male victims who suffered
incidents resulting in at least one day of restricted activity fell from 12,440 or 3.4% of all
victims to 7,146 or 2.7%. Female victims, however, experienced the opposite trend. The num-
bers of women who experienced restricted activity following an incident of violence increased
both in absolute numbers as well as in relative numbers, from 9,533 or 3.6% of all female
victims in 1980 to 11,974 or 5.1% in 1988. Not only were women more likely to be victims
of violence in 1988 than they had been in 1980, their likelihood of suffering restricted activity

as a consequence had almost doubled.

 

 
36

Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

 

Class

Race

 

Thus, a higher proportion of the violent incidents was directed against women in 1988 than
in 1980. The likelihood that such incidents would result in reduced activity had increased in
both absolute and relative terms for women, even though there were fewer female (and male)
victims in 1988 than in 1980. In other words, the acts of violence had become more

violent.

Version A versus Version B

Very different messages emerge from the two versions. In Version A, the typical victim is a
young single man. In Version B, the typical male victim is a victim of street violence and the
typical female victim is a victim of family violence. In Version A the likelihood of a victim
experiencing restricted activity had slightly decreased. In Version B the likelihood had decreased

for men but increased for women.

In Version B the statistics clearly demonstrate that violence is a gendered experience, in that
violence is rooted in social conditions, behaviours and attitudes and plays out differently in the
lives of men and women. It is a sign of the quality of the publication that the data provided
were detailed enough to allow us to re-compute and re-analyse the conclusions. Had the study
not collected data by sex, (i.e. been completely gender-insensitive) we would not have been able
to examine gender differences in the experience of violence among women and men. On the
other hand, the study does not identify the sex of the perpetrator and, therefore, we cannot

explore gender issues relate © perpetrators in our re-ana SiS O e€ data.
plore gend. lated to perpetrat lysis of the dat

 

 

 

Turning to a different type of problem, opinions expressed by members of a dominant group
about members of a non-dominant group are sometimes treated as facts rather than opinions
(D 5). For instance, in studies of occupational health, managers sometimes are asked about the
experiences of workers. While the managers’ views may be an important part of the overall picture,
they should not be taken as representative of the actual experience of workers. To cite just one
example, a study of workers in electronics factories in Thailand found that workers do not wear
protective gear. Management interpreted not wearing protective gear as the workers’ failure.
However, as the workers explained, when “we have a big order to meet and the pressure is on, they
[the protective gear] slow you down and there is a sort of group agreement not to wear the stuff
so that we can all work quicker” (Theobald, 2002: 20). It turned out that managers had been the
ones to put on the pressure for speedier production.

The solution is to note the managers’ opinions in assessing occupational health risk as their

opinions and to compare and contrast them with those of the workers.

Failure to examine differences sometimes occurs when comparing attitudes of whites and people
of colour towards medical professionals (F 1). “For many racial and ethnic minorities... prefe-
rences for treatment are often difficult to separate from mistrust of health professions that stems
from racial discrimination and the history of segregated and inferior care for minorities...”
(Smedley et al., 2003: 131). Studies that fail to take this into account sometimes contrast “prefe-
rences” with racial discrimination as competing explanations for health care disparities, rather
than recognizing that the preferences themselves may be shaped by past experiences. The solution

is to contextualize the situation by taking such factors into account.
Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

37

 

A recent critique of Transcultural Nursing Theory (TNC) points out: “T'NC texts implicitly
legitimise whiteness as a politically neutral identity position from which to interpret race
difference” (H 1) (Gustafson, 2005: 16). They do so by assuming equality of opportunity and
by failing to acknowledge the complex histories of colonized and marginalized peoples and the
privileges that accrue to whiteness (Dei, 2000). Inequality between nurses of colour and white
nurses then can be attributed to individual inferiority or inability to integrate into the dominant

society (H 4) (Gustafson, 2004).

Studies on sexual violence that fail to disaggregate data on the basis of disability miss one of the
major axes along which people are victimized. Most studies on sexual violence fail to include
disability as an analytical variable, even though research that does focus on disability has “found
that people with disabilities are more likely than others to be subjected to acts of violence and
abuse...” (Rioux et al., 1997: 203). This is an instance of insensitivity to difference (F1), as

disability status is not included as a relevant analytical variable.

In data analysis, there can often be a tendency to write up the results in a way that pathologizes
people who differ from the norm (H4). For example, rather than describing the different ways
some people communicate, alternate modes of communication are pathologized and treated as

deficits and abnormal.

Conclusions

Conclusions are drawn on the basis of the analysis of the findings and results of the research.
Typically, they describe what was learnt, provide an evaluation of the research and its short-
comings, make recommendations that ensue from the research and give directions for future

research.

Biased conclusions can result if the analyses on which they are based were biased, or if certain
aspects of the results are ignored or swept aside. In the Finnish example, cited earlier in this book,
Versions A and B demonstrated how a re-analysis of the data using a BIAS FREE approach could
have resulted in very different messages emanating from the study concerning the gendered

experience of violence.

The solution would have been to remove the bias from the analysis and rewrite the conclu-
sions. This, in fact, was done in a Tanzanian study of the impact of user fees on access to health
care (Manzi, Mbuyita, & Urassa, 2003). The original conclusions were drafted on the basis of
analysis that was gender-biased. When an application of the BIAS FREE Framework pointed
out the problems in the study, one of the members of the research team took the paper back to
the original research team. The team then wrote a voluntary supplementary report focusing on
the gender aspects that had been missed (such as the exclusion of women from community
governance structures and gender differences in expenditure patterns), and they are discussing
recommendations to be added to their report. These preliminary results were reported at
Forum 9 of the Global Forum for Health Research in Mumbai, India, in September 2005
(Mbuyita, 2005).

Policy recommendations and practices

The BIAS FREE Framework can be applied to policies and policy development in a manner
parallel to the way it is used in research, although the elements of these processes are somewhat

different. We are dealing here only briefly with policy recommendations that derive from research.

Disabled children are often deprived of important resources that would aid their development,
because they are subjected to practices that view an ability hierarchy as normal and unproblematic

(H 2). For instance:

Ability

Ability
38

Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

 

Gender

Gender
Race
Ability
Poverty

Gender

A focus on investment in healthy child development that uses a set of norm-
referenced indicators to measure that a child in the 0-6 age group is ready to
learn ignores that many disabled children may never be able to meet “age
appropriate” physical, motor development, language skills, etc. If failure to meet
these benchmarks by children who, for instance, move or communicate in
different ways then results in these children not being eligible for certain early
childhood services because they are seen to be unable to benefit from such an
investment, this results in excluding these children (Bach, 2002: 18).

Maintenance of the hierarchy (H 2) thus leads to exclusion (D 2). The solution to this biased
policy is to shift the focus from one of strict age-related developmental stages to an understanding
that each child has a unique developmental path. This includes “unique ways of realising different
developmental tasks whether they be managing communication and interacting with others,
developing personal identity, moving from adolescence into adulthood” (Bach, 2002: 19).

Disabled people often have decisions made on their behalf by professionals, parents, medical
staff, social service organizations, etc. sometimes against their expressed wishes. This is an example
of denying agency at the level of policy (D 4). By contrast, the disabled peoples’ movement defines
“independent living” as “being in control of one’s life” (MacFarlane, 2004: 189). Thus, the solution
to denying agency in this case, is to respect disabled peoples’ Auman right to self determination and

to decision-making about the things that affect them, and to support them in their decision-making.

There are clear gender patterns in diagnoses given by doctors. For instance, women are more
readily diagnosed with psychological and psychiatric illness than are men who present with similar
symptoms, while men with somatic and physiological complaints receive quicker diagnoses than
do women (Kolip & Hurrelmann, 2004: 20-21; Leo, 2001).

This is an instance of an overt double standard (D 1) — the failure to give the same treatment.
The solution is to devise checks so that women are tested equally for somatic and physiological

illnesses, and men for psychological and psychiatric illnesses.

Decontextualization (F 2) may lead to hidden double standards. For instance, user fees for health
services may seem fair on the surface — ie. everyone pays the same. In fact, however, user fees
discriminate against the poorest segments of society (in which women, children, homeless people,
marginally employed people, and people on disability and other types of pensions typically
predominate). For instance, Yoder (1989) documented that the introduction of or increase in fees
for services in Swaziland resulted in declining attendance at government health facilities frequented
by the poor. It also resulted in lower rates of immunization against childhood diseases (D 8).
Similar findings were reported from Tanzania (Manzi, Mbuyita, & Urassa, 2003).

This problem can be identified by asking: “Has the different social reality of dominant and
non-dominant groups explicitly been considered?” Once such differential effects have been iden-
tified, the solution might consist of either abolishing user fees or introducing a graduated system

in which people pay according to their means.

Communication of results
Authorship and other forms of credit
Historically, there are many examples in which authorship of jointly authored pieces of work has

been claimed only by a member of a dominant group; this is appropriation (H 7).

After the advent of the feminist movement in the 1970s, a number of male anthropologists whose
wives had done half the fieldwork started publishing their work under both names. For instance,

Yolanda and Robert F. Murphy describe the fieldwork they conducted 20 years earlier as follows:
Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health 39

 

Most of our days were spent by Yolanda among the women and Robert among
the men. She sat with the women in their houses, worked with them in making
manioc flour, went with them to the gardens, bathed with them, and helped
them take care of the children. When she was not with them, one or more
women were usually in our house. Mundurucu women are eminently
gregarious, and she soon became included in most of their activities
(Murphy & Murphy, 1974).

They reflected on the process when they wrote a joint book about Munduruct women. At the
time, the fieldwork resulted in an MA thesis for Yolanda, and a slew of publications for Robert
(cited in Murphy & Murphy, 1974).

Occasionally, professors use their students’ work without giving any credit to the students.
The same appropriation takes place when supervisors in research organizations or government
departments identify themselves as authors in cases where the work has been carried out by their

subordinates.

Title

It may seem trivial to examine titles with respect to bias; but, in fact, this is a very important
issue. Bias takes on special importance when dealing with titles. In just a few words, the title
conveys the focus and applicability of the research. As well, it is important to ensure that language
and concepts used in the title are not biased.

Today much of the literature is accessed via computer searches that check for particular words
or word combinations. It is difficult to assess whether a reference is relevant or not when the titles
are not sufficiently specific. Much literature still takes a middle-aged white male with a normative
body and mind as reference point; often enough, studies that include only such people are couched
in general terms. If the study is about women or girls, it is more likely that our attention will be drawn
to this in the title. The same applies to race in countries with populations that are primarily of Eu-

ropean origin, where race is specified in the title only when the study deals with non-white people.

When looking at titles, one of the questions we ask is: “Has the relevance of membership in
dominant/non-dominant group been ignored?” (F 1) If we then apply it to the gender hierarchy,
we would be alerted when a vital part of the information about the study is omitted in the title.
For example, a review of 1,041 articles in 17 English-language, addictions-specific journals found
that males were much more likely to be included in the studies than females. “In 45.0% of
the studies with 80% or more of male or female subjects, there was no indication in either the title
or the abstract that the study was a single-sex study or was based mostly on one sex” (Brett,
Graham, & Smythe, 1995: 29).

The obvious solution is to identify the sex (and race) of research participants in the title.

Studies that deliberately screen out specific groups, e.g. disabled people, as is often the case,
(see, for instance, Bittman et al., 2003) should include in the title that they are dealing with a non-

disabled population only.

Abstract/Executive summary
Abstracts and executive summaries are one of the main communication tools for disseminating
the results of research. Given that a lot of information is accessed today via computer searches on

keywords, it is important to be specific as to the applicability of a given study. This will usually

Professional
Status

Gender
Race

Disability
40

Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

 

Gender
Race
Ability

Gender

Race

Ability

require specification of the particular group that was the focus of the study. Failing this, a lot of time

and effort will be wasted in going through the literature that is inappropriate for specific purposes.

The same points as are made for titles apply, even more strongly, to abstracts and summaries of
all types. It is frustrating to read a study summarized as studying 205 people without being told

their sex, race and/or other salient characteristics.

Language

Bias in various languages has received a great deal of attention. For the purposes of this book, we
will restrict ourselves to biases in the English language. English has been criticized for being sexist,
racist and ableist, and considerable efforts have been made to overcome these problems. For
instance, a number of guides to non-sexist, anti-racist and anti-ableist language have been deve-
loped (see below).

However, guides concerning non-sexist language usually address two problems that we have
discussed under the rubric of concepts. We did so because both practices become problematic
through the meaning attached to a concept, rather than being located at the level of language. We
are referring to the practice of using sex-specific terms for general situations (the generic “he” —
D1) and the practice of using general terms for sex-specific situations (e.g. talking about all citizens
when only men have been considered — F3). The latter also applies to other non-dominant groups,
such as people of colour and disabled people, when they are excluded from consideration, but this

has not been noted.

One manifestation of sexism in language is a non-parallel use of terms or grammar, such as when
men are referred to by their last names (Mr. Smith) and women by their first names (Jane) — an
obvious double standard. Similarly, dealing with women in the passive voice and men in the active
voice, as is often the case, is another example of a double standard (D 1). The same treatment for
both sexes easily solves this.

Further, women or girls are sometimes described in derogatory or objectifying language (H 5
Objectification). An example would be a speech by the President of the Pacific Coast Obstetrical
and Gynecological Society in which he shared his thoughts concerning surrogacy. He offered his
sympathy to “barren women” who are condemned to remain childless, and put forward as a
solution to their problem disembodied “uteri” who will produce, in a number of ways, children
for these women. These “normally functioning uteri of ‘off-duty’ gestational specialists” would
help “women who seek the bliss of motherhood” (Eichler, 1994: 193). While the “barren women”
are seen as women, the women who would bear the children are not there as persons at all —
although it is they who would carry all the risks associated with childbearing. This language may
also carry over into research on infertility and its treatment.

"...[I]n everyday language — ‘whiteness’ is associated with overwhelmingly positive connotations,
while ‘blackness', in Roget's Thesaurus, has no fewer than sixty distinctly negative synonyms, twenty
of which are related to race” (H 5) (Henry et al., 2000: 57). There are several attempts to develop
guides to non-racist language, such as the British Sociological Association’s 1997 anti-racist

language guide.

There are also guides dealing with disability and ableist language. The British Council of Orga-
nizations of Disabled Persons (BCODP) has listed 11 disability-related stereotypes in the English
language. These include portraying the disabled person as pitiable and pathetic, sinister and evil;
as a burden; as an object of violence or ridicule; as curio or super cripple; as sexually abnormal; as
incapable of participating in community life; and as their own worst and only enemy (H 5).
Among this array of negative depictions, BCODP lists the stereotype of disabled person as
“normal”, which in effect denies the whole experience of disability (F 1) (Barnes, 1992).
Chapter 3. Applying the BIAS FREE Framework to research for health

41

 

Visual representation
As with language, visual representations can carry powerful messages about dominant and
non-dominant groups. Visual representations may include: actual pictures, such as photographs;
reproductions of paintings; cartoons; and charts and graphs.

The size and placement of images should correspond to the actual importance of the group
within the given context. This point is relevant not only with respect to pictures of people, but

in particular with respect to graphs.

A content analysis of psychology texts for gender bias found that photographs depicted negative

stereotypes of women and men in traditional gender roles:

For example, in a review of psychology texts... women were presented in pho-
tographs as mentally ill or as passive participants in psychological research,
e.g., looking on while a male investigator conducted an experiment. Males were
more often depicted as therapists or researchers (Leo, 2001).

Ability
 

IV Theoretical framework and
concepts

ag
=
co
ww
r-4
i]
ro
o

 

Pervasive inequalities
Pervasive social inequalities have negative health consequences and contribute substantially to

global health inequities and the "10/90 gap" in health research.

Mirroring these inequities, in health research itself there is an imbalance
globally in how resources are applied. The 1990 Commission on Health Research
for Development...estimated that less than 10% of the world’s resources for
health research (which totalled US$ 30 billion in 1986) were being applied to the
health problems of developing countries, where 90% of the avoidable burden of
ill-health was to be found. Since then, the expression ‘10/90 gap’ has become a
symbol of inequity in global expenditures on health research and, while global
health research spending has more than tripled, a large imbalance remains
(Burke & de Francisco, 2005: vii)

Power structures and the generation of knowledge

One of the ways in which power structures manifest is in research and knowledge generation of
all types. Explorations of knowledge, science and medicine and their inter-relationships, and of
how to identify “expertise” in these domains date as far back as Plato (Plato, 1986). One of the
best known formulations in this tradition comes from Karl Marx who stated that what is accepted
as knowledge represents the ideology of the ruling class (Marx & Engels, 1932). With the advent
of feminist scholarship,'3 scholars turned their minds to disentangling the many ways in which
male dominance has shaped our understanding of how societies work (Hess & Ferree, 1987),
what constitutes science (Harding, 1986; Harding & Hintikka, 1983; Herschberger, 1948), and
how research itself is a product of social relations that are deeply informed by a gender hierarchy
(M. Eichler, 1991; O'Brien, 1981; Sherman & Beck, 1979; Sydie, 1987; Tomm, 1989). Sexism
is embedded in the very language and concepts we use (Klein, 1997; Lapointe & Eichler, 1985;
Spender, 1980; Waring, 1988a).

Partially in reaction to the feminist literature that presented gender as the single most impor-
tant social hierarchy, the anti-racist literature developed arguments that racism had parallel effects
on scholarship (Anzaldua, 1990; Bhavnani, 1993, 2001; Commonwealth Secretariat, 1999; Essed,
1991; Fine et al., 1997; Henry et al., 2000; Jhappan, 1996; McClintock, 1995a, 1995b; Mchanty,
Russo, & Torres, 1991; L.'T. Smith, 1999).

 

13 The feminist and anti-racist literatures on these topics are enormous. The citations provide only a few selected

examples.
Chapter 4 Theoretical framework and concepts

 

Disability studies began to engage in a similar process of critique in the late 1970s in response
to continued institutionalization, segregation, medicalization and eugenic practices, such as
enforced sterilization of disabled people. With the emergence of critical disability studies, acade-
mics, researchers and activists began to focus on the social model of disability, on the removal of
barriers to participation and societal inclusion, and on notions of oppression, identity and human
rights (Abberley, 1997; Albrecht, Seelman, & Bury, 2001; Barnes & Mercer, 1996; Bergum, 1996;
Davis, 1995; Eichler, Reisman, & Borins, 1992; Frazee et al., 2002; Thomson, 2002).

Rights-based model of health

A rights-based model of health emerged with the 1948 World Health Organization definition of
health, and offers a framework for understanding the conditions needed to create and sustain
health that is applicable to all people, regardless of their social status or condition. It rests on the
following three basic relationships:

1. Health policies, programmes and practices have an impact on human rights.

2. Violations or lack of fulfilment of human rights have negative effects on health
(physical, mental, social and spiritual well-being)

3. Health and human rights act in synergy. Promoting and protecting health requires
explicit and concrete efforts to promote and protect human rights and dignity; greater
fulfillment of human rights necessitates sound attention to health and its societal
determinants. Paying attention to the interrelationship between health and human
rights may help to re-orient thinking about major global challenges to health and to

broadening human rights thinking and practices (Mann et al., 1999: 8).

Logic of domination

By logic of domination, we mean “a structure of argumentation that provides the moral premise
that superiority justifies subordination” (Warren, 1993b: 257). This is the aspect that is common
to all “isms” of domination—sexism, racism, ableism, classism, heterosexism, ageism, etc. The
basis for superiority is variously identified. Warren, from whom we have adapted this argument,
uses rationality as the distinguishing characteristic that allows the human domination of nature
and the female identification with nature that result in male superiority. The logic of domination
applies equally when being white is regarded as superior to being of colour, or having a normative
body or mind superior to being disabled. In other words, the basic conceptual interconnections
among all systems of oppression is the logic of domination (Warren, 1987, 1993a, 1993b). The

BIAS FREE Framework is premised on this conceptual interconnection.

Values and objectivity

A question that arises within this context is the issue of objectivity. Feminist, anti-racist and
anti-ableist literatures are sometimes charged with being non-objective, since they are openly
committed to improving the situation of disadvantaged groups. This type of criticism derives
from a particular understanding of the meaning of objectivity. (For a more extended discussion
of the objectivity debate, see Eichler, 1997b). There are multiple meanings associated with this
concept. Two prominent interpretations equate objectivity with value freedom and/or emotional
detachment.

As Max Weber pointed out a century ago, research is never value free (Weber, 1977). Mini-
mally, the decision to conduct research in a given area reflects a value judgement — that the
subject under research is worthy of being researched and having human and other resources
dedicated to this purpose. Failure to conduct research in a given area also reflects a value judgement
that it is not worthy of similar investments. This is an important point given the huge inequities
in health and health research, symbolized by the expression “10/90 gap” in health research.

The issue of “emotional detachment” is likewise based on a misperception. Facts and

statements do not become true or false because their proponents are emotionally involved or
Chapter 4 Theoretical framework and concepts 45

 

uninvolved. In fact, it is questionable if it is ever possible to be completely emotionally detached.
The position of privilege enjoyed by members of the dominant groups contributes to their own
sense of emotional comfort. They typically fail to recognize this, as it is part of their “normal”
experience. Challenges to the status quo thus can be seen to disturb the emotional!‘ comfort of
the dominant group and may partially explain why there is often resistance to change. Likewise,
those in the dominant group typically see those who challenge the status quo as being “emotionally

charged”. This is often used as a reason to invalidate the concerns of those seeking change.

Objectivity as property of a scientific community
More importantly, however, these interpretations treat objectivity as an individual property rather
than as the property of a scientific community.

Longino argues that the goal of objectivity is "to block the influence of subjective preference
at the level of background assumptions involved in observation and inference, as well as the
influence of individual variation in perception at the level of observation" (Longino, 1993: 265).

Objectivity requires minimally four criteria!> that must be satisfied for it to become possible:
! y feq y

This requires that avenues for the presentation of criticism be the same as those for "original

research”.

Mere tolerance for criticism and dissent is not sufficient for objectivity; instead, critics must play
a role in shaping the views of an objective community. This means widening the scientific com-
munity by including people with experiential expertise as acknowledged members of the commu-
nity. This requires that all stakeholders participate in critical discussions and that the assumptions
that govern their group activities remain logically sensitive to it.!© This is well captured by the di-

sability community's slogan: “Nothing about us without us” (DPI Solihull Declaration, 2000).

To allow for such a process, there must be some shared elements. These can include substantive
principles and an understanding of what counts as knowledge and social values. Individuals must
acknowledge the relevance of such standards to the evaluation of cognitive practices in their com-

munity of inquiry. Such standards must be open to criticism by appealing to other standards.

This requires that arguments must be evaluated on the basis of the agreed upon criteria rather than
on the status of the person(s) making them. Not only must a community treat all its acknowledged
members as equally capable of providing persuasive and decisive reasons, it must take active steps
to ensure that alternative views are developed to be robust sources of criticism. In other words, not
only must dissenting voices zot be discounted, but they must be actively cultivated (Longino,
1993: 266-268). “Knowledge and objectivity, in this view, are identified as the outcomes of social
interactions and, hence, are located not in individuals but in communities” (Longino, 1993: 268).

The mere aspiration of objectivity must not be mistaken for being objective. This allows us
to understand the contribution that feminist research has made to making research more objective.
Adding the voices of anti-racist, anti-ableist and other equality-seeking scholars and activists in

a central manner is a necessary step to obtain objectivity in health research.

Social construction of knowledge

Epistemologists and sociologists have long explored the construction of knowledge (Harding,

1986; Harding & Hintikka, 1983; Keller, 1985; Keller & Longino, 1996; Sydie, 1987). Sociology

14 Tn a like manner, such challenges may also disturb the economic, social and political comfort of the dominant group.

15 The following draws heavily on Longino (1993). Adaptations and some additions were made by the authors.

16 This is in line with the Global Forum for Health Research’s approach as stated in the Foreword of Mental and neurological
health and the millenium development goals (Matin, 2004).

Recognized
avenues

for criticism
Community
response

Shared
standards

Equality of
intellectual
authority
46

Chapter 4 Theoretical framework and concepts

 

of scientific knowledge studies social influences — including prevailing values and beliefs — on
scientific knowledge in particular, and conversely, the influence of scientific knowledge on society.
One of the key findings of this long-established field of inquiry is that research tends to reflect
power structures within society. This has been formulated within sociology as follows:

¢ All knowledge is socially constructed.

* What is accepted as a dominant ideology is the ideology of the ruling group.

¢ There cannot be such a thing as value-free science.

¢ The perspectives of people, including their insights into the workings of society, vary

systematically with their position within that society.
* Objectivity is maximized to the degree to which disadvantaged groups are able to

contribute to knowledge generation (Adapted from Eichler, 1985).

Biases in health research

Generally, biases are well hidden. Careful systematic analysis is needed to uncover them, as they
are often part of taken-for-granted basic assumptions accepted by the majority of researchers.
It is, therefore, not easy to identify biases and even harder to convince researchers to avoid them.
The identification of biases that derive from social hierarchies, and how they play out in the
various elements of the research process, enables researchers to see how their research could be
improved by removing the biases. The BJAS FREE Framework helps illustrate how biases operate,
allows researchers to “see” differently, and points to solutions for reframing their work to remove
identified biases.

Research that is biased is, by definition, bad research. The following examples demonstrate
how biases deriving from various social hierarchies can result in biased research.

We know that biases in the way we research health problems can literally be deadly. One of
the best-known examples of biased medical research concerns heart attack symptoms. For a long
time, coronary research concentrated on males, hence symptoms identified were those typical of
males with the result that when women presented with different symptoms, they were less likely
to be diagnosed as suffering heart attacks. Failure to diagnose led to inappropriate treatment and
resulted in higher mortality rates for women. Fortunately, these differences are by now well known
and some corrective actions have been taken (Turek, 2000).

A review of the literature found that African-Americans with coronary artery disease and acute
myocardial infarction “are significantly less likely to receive appropriate cardiac procedures or
therapies” (Geiger, 2003: 426). This “does not reflect problems of primary access to health care”
since the studies are based on “persons already im the health care system” (Geiger, 2003: 426).

Looking at the intersections between race and sex, several studies found that when white and
black female and male patients presented with the same symptoms physicians varied in their
diagnoses and prescriptions to the detriment of people of colour, mediated by sex. For example,
in one study that used videotaped actors who displayed the same symptoms of cardiac disease,
white and black male and white female “patients” were referred to catheterization at about the same
rates (90%) but black females were significantly less likely to be recommended (Smedley et al.,
2003: 11).

In contrast to the biases in research on the basis of gender and race, it is the /ack of research
on how to overcome biases on the part of medical professionals that may be deadly for disabled
people. There is evidence that disabled people are often under-treated for their medical problems
(Asch, 2001; Peat, 1997). In some cases, this is because they are not seen as worthy of medical
interventions as has been the case for many years, for example, for people with Down Syndrome
(Kmietowicz, 2001). In others, it may be because their symptoms are not recognized or that the
attending physician has difficulty communicating with the person to ascertain the nature of the
problem. People who have difficulty expressing themselves verbally and who are in pain sometimes
exhibit behaviour that is deemed to be inappropriate, overly aggressive, etc. They may be diagno-

sed as mentally unstable and in need of restraint. Rather than recognizing pain as the source of
Chapter 4 Theoretical framework and concepts

47

 

their agitation and treating it, medical professionals sometimes wrap the patients in straitjackets
and commit them to mental institutions. Left unattended, the medical problem causing the pain
(stomach ulcers, obstructed bowels, etc.) continues to progress, leading to a worsening of the
medical condition and in some cases to premature death (Quellette-Kuntz, Garcin, & Lewis,
2004; Wolbring, 2001).

These examples demonstrate the gravity of failing to remove biases. To avoid biases in health
research, with their sometimes-fatal consequences, we need to identify and remove biases that

derive from all types of social hierarchies.
 

V Conclusion

Historically, people have experienced much harm because of biases deriving from social hierarchies.
In health research, this is in direct contrast to the ethical principle of “do no harm”. Health and
human rights are inextricably linked, yet inequities in health and health research persist on a
global scale.

The examples provided in this book convey the scope and the gravity of the problems and
underscore that some of them are of life-and-death importance. Achieving real improvements
in global health and reducing inequities in health and health research are dependent on more
widespread and systematic recognition and removal of these biases.

We offer the BIAS FREE Framework as a tool for uncovering and eliminating biases in health
research that derive from social hierarchies, and for operationalizing a rights-based approach to
health and health research. Our book highlights the theoretical underpinnings of the Framework,
the logical connections among the various hierarchies, the biases derived from the hierarchies and
how they manifest in research.

We recognize that it is never easy or quick to eliminate biases that derive from social hierarchies
given their structural and systemic nature; however, asking the questions presented in the frame-
work alerts us to the presence of biases in previously reported research, and to the potential for
biases when planning or conducting research. The solutions provided point the way to removing
the biases. Sometimes, putting the corrective measures into action will be straightforward and
easy to accomplish. At other times, concerted and co-ordinated efforts by the various stakeholders
involved in the research may be needed. Identifying the problems and the required solutions will
assist greatly in this process.

Failure to address biases in research that derive from social hierarchy will contribute to the
persistence of global social, economic and health inequities. Research that fails to address these

biases cannot go unchallenged as biased research is, by definition, bad research, and ultimately

bad for health.

 
51

900% BAN 3B 4a] yoly

 

suoreyuasaidal [enst, -
osensuryq -
Arewrunsg sarmmsexy -
poemsqy -
oBLL -
synsoy
jo voneorunww05
suorepusumtuoser Adt[og
suoIsnpuO;
uonejerdiaqur
pue sis{yeue e1eq
squedionred
jo WuSUIMIDY -
s]USUINIISUT /samMseayyy -
spoyjour
jo uondipseq -
Spoyour yoIEasay
YoMoUTET [EOTIAIOIY |,
sidaou077
perpnis oq 0} UOT
-etndod jo uondrpsaq -
stsoyodAyy -
yeuores
pure esodind Apnig -
uSIsop
pur uorsonb yoreasoy

MOTAT oNTeIONW'T,

pawadsas pup paspaymougon st Gigssaumo JVUISUO

édnoi3 jueutwop uou ay} 01 Suojeq Jo ur
(p)eeurzi0 yey} sormue soy dnos3 yueurwop ey

Aq pourep diyszoumo sq :uoneudoiddy 2H

 

‘ajquiunosmv
pyag aap aqisuodsas asogi pup Spaifiuapt st aouazora
JPANIINAIS 40/PUP JUMPIAIPUL PAULV]G JOU aAV SULLIILA

eo qeyunoooe
PPy pue pewuryq soUs[OlA yemyonays J0/pue yenp
“AIpur jo summpra ony :BUILUR]G-WUNSIA 9H

 

Gsurpsovon gadvasas ag) ianpuos pup patsaioad aq
INU PUP AfQUIOLAUL a4p IDY SIYBtA UpIUNY puw Ciusip
JISULAIUA SPY Bulag UpUEnY Adana 1DYI Az1UBOIAY

reurstqordun Jo feurrou se
pajuasord pooyuosiad pue Ayrusrp oisuryur ey}
jo dood Suiddins sy :uoneoynoelqg SH

 

“dnoss ayn SurzBopogivnd
40f WaaId SUOSDAL Ay] SSALPPY PU UWLLOU aYi aBUATIVG)

idnoiz queurWop of} Wort peAaliep suuroUu
oY Wo siayrp 1 usys peziZojoyyed dnoss
jueuTWwop-uou stp sy :uoeziBojouled PH

 

‘paidesw pup pawadsas asp sdnoss
jupunuop pup jupunuop-uou fo saanoadssad ag J

gpaidope dnoz3 jueurwop eri jo yurodpuels 10
aarpedsiad ayi sy taaijoedsied jueuIWiOg EH

 

ponpuggosd

Pup pauousanb JAD sagoamary fo suorssadxy

gorewsygordun so peurrou
se pojuasaid Ayporesory & UO paseq are Tey] SMoTA

Jo ssoroeid ary :Ayouesaly Bulurezule|A| ZH

 

paroalas pup pauorsonb SE uOLppiypa

gATeIJUOD BY 01

2ouaprae peaidsaprm jo ouds ut potuep Aypressry

dgoapsarg

ag usoif ynsas vgs adoad
fo sdnosd Suousy souay
-vnbaut aga pup anqva siqa
uaamtag doundasasip agi
10 1U10,, anjoa Supapun
up st (anba qaqa us
‘qgeomauunel s14ysi4 uDUEnG PD
uigum ualgosd agi avnnS

spauimuipus 40 paifiusnl

dpm dup ut sayi0 agi 4aa0
Tnos8 auo fo aaupunuop st

Ayouessiy Bulsixe

(stoy10 Suouwre)

snyeqs Yeo}
UOTIEDOT

peoryder3oer

UOTIETUSTIO [enKeS

uorsty

ay

ose)

Sse[D)

AIDIUYAY /298Y

Aumqesiq

qopuary

 

 

 

Jesodord ypreasayy « su Spadpaymougon st kgoamsaig v fo aruagsixa ay [ 8 Jo sousIstxe oy sy :AYosBualy BulAUaGq LH ue Bululequiey| - H
INaW37a AdAL AHOUWHSIH
HOuVvaSay NOLLNTOS WATEOUd JO JUNLVN 31g 0ud NIVIN 4O AdAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

yoieeseay 10)
WYOMIAINVYA F744 SVid AHL

 
52

900% BAN 3B 4a] yoly

 

suoreyuasaidal [enst, -
osensuryq -
Arewrunsg sarmmsexy -
poemsqy -
oBLL -
synsoy
jo voneorunww05
suorepusumtuoser Adt[og
suoIsnpuo_
uonejerdiaqur
pue sis{yeue e1eq
squedionred
jo WuSUIMIDY -
s]USUINIISUT /samMseayyy -
spoyjour
jo uondipseq -
Spoyour yoIEasay
YoMoUTET [EOTIAIOIY |,
sidaou077
perpnis oq 0} UOT
-etndod jo uondrpsaq -
stsoyodAyy -
yeuores
pure esodind Apnig -
uSIsop
pur uorsonb yoreasoy
MOTAIT QINTCIONT

FUNOIID OFUL Udy pup paspajmougop dp sdnoas

JUpUIULOP-uOU pup TuDuiuop urgiin saouasalfiCT

idnoid
wuojiun & se poyeor] dnozd Jueurwop vou Jo Jeu

-Twop ays, :AyauaHouwoy paunssy 4

 

“dnoss 1upuruop aya o1 partway

dp Suoisnj2u0) 40 NOLS JUDUIULOP-uOU ay] InOgY UOT]
-vuedofus uinigo 01 apous adv Siaoffa pup ‘yons sp pas
-pajmouzon st dnosd Jupumuop agi inogy uorwuLsofuy

sdnoi3 ueuruop-u0u

oy 0} afqeordde st 31 jr Suruturexe oyUM
sdnoi3 jueutwop-uou 01 peziperoued sdnoigd
jueUTWOp Wo peatap UOTTeUTIOFUT sy 7UON}

BZIJ[ESIOAIUN 10 UOIEZe1aUaH4ABAGQ E4

 

‘qUNODID OIL UayDI
pup pastjpuv parfiuaym aap sig usoxf Suimopof saruad
-alfip pup paunuvxa (uoydxa st digssaquaus (nos

JUDUILOP-UOULUDUTLLOP OF qoadsad Gun 4ANAIUOD ogy

gperapisuos useq Aporydxe
sdnoi3 jueutwop-uou pur JueuTWOp Jo Auyear [eros

JUsIOFIp oy] see] :uolezyenyxajuoI9g = Z4

 

‘passassp ag aoupaajas sit upa uagy duo pup Meanov aya
IMOYSNOLG AQUIADA JDILUIDUY UP SP papnjoul ag Isnus
Tiyssaquiaus nods Spaurusaap aq shvmyp isnus digs

gpe0ust useq dnois
jueuTWwop-uoU/lueUTWOp UT drystaquieur Jo 2ueA

dgoamiarg ayy aonpad Es
sho us sssuasaffip aippous
-ULOIID “Payst|quisa St agupa
-aat BIUQ) “IxaqUuOD UaAId

v uigum digssaquiaus nose

fe IIUDAIIIA off GSU QUIS

(Panpowuulosap pup jupa
-afae M905 sv pauruepxa
dnos8 jupunuoppiupuiuop

uou v us diyssaquiaus sy

saoualayip SUI

(stoy10 Suouwre)

snyeqs Yeo}
UOTIEDOT

peoryder3oer

UOTIETUSTIO [enKeS

uorsty

ay

ose)

Sse[D)

AIDIUYAY /298Y

Aumqesiq

qopuary

 

 

 

qesodord ypreasay -saquaus noss 1upuiuop-uoupjupuiuop fo asupaajay -o[er OUI SeE] iaouasayip 0} APIAIISUaSU] L4 -exe 0} Huljiey - 4
LN&IA 14 ddAL AHOYVYSsIH
HOuWaSaY CS STO esi W3180Ud NIV 4O 3dAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

yoieeseay 10)
WYOMIAINVYA F744 SVid AHL

 
53

900% BAN 3B 4a] yoly

 

suoreyuasaidal [enst, -
osensuryq -
Arewrunsg sarmmsexy -
poemsqy -
oBLL -
synsoy
jo voneorunww05
suorepusumtuoser Adt[og
suoIsnpuO;
uonejerdiaqur
pue sis{yeue e1eq
squedionred
jo WuSUIMIDY -
s]USUINIISUT /samMseayyy -
spoyjour
jo uondipseq -
Spoyour yoIEasay
YoMoUTET [EOTIAIOIY |,
sidaou077
perpnis oq 0} UOT
-etndod jo uondrpsaq -
stsoyodAyy -
yeuores
pure esodind Apnig -
uSIsop
pur uorsonb yoreasoy

MOTAT oNTeIONW'T,

“dnoss sagioup urgiun aguy 1gdiue dnoss auo uigum
parfisuap uouausouayd agi uLtof gm Burgsy Ag st sigs
Suraaigon fo (vm auc sjayvand snorago-uou 4of Suigooj
Ag PADPULIS AJQnOP UappIY V Iq 14S aiays saqagm ysy

eAnyiqereduroo ney Surpry Jo ayo
otf} TIM sey 2]qereduro suljep Oo} pesn. PMO

juereyTp ery :pawpueys a]qnop UappIH 8G

 

‘sdnosd jupunuop Pup jupunuop-uou fo SAIQULIUL uIan
“4dq SOUMMDTUGAIS off Pup saguasalfip off Glog FUMUNIOT,

gsdnoi3 jueurwop/jueutwop uou ATUO
Jo orstzaqoerey arom Aoyy JT se poyeorl siren Surd
-dejieao ary :seouaiayip Buyesabbexyq 7q

 

‘SQIMAL SP IOU ‘sad dqoasays SP sadiqoasags DIAL

édryssoquiewr dnoid jo syodse
[enuesse se poyeor] sdnow3 jueurwop /ueuTUIOp
uou jo sadAjoazays ary :BuidAjoa1a1g 9q

 

wouf jou ‘suowuido sp paras adv sdnoid jupurumop
-uou nog sdnos8 1upunuop Ag passasdxa suorurdc,

aoey se porean dnosZ yueurwop uou &
mnoge dnoa3 jueurwop & Aq pessardxe suorurdo ary
:sjoRy se suoiuido jueulwop Buea, gq

 

‘uodn paioy sp pam sp Bunn giog asp sdnoss
JUDUIULOP-UOU PUP JUDUIULOP YoIym us sivm aux

guodn payse pue
SIOPE YO Se sdnoi3 JueuTWwop/JueUTUOp uou qop
-Isuoo 0] oinjrey e ort sy :AQuaBe BulAueq 7q

 

“dnos8 tupuruop-uou v 40f (quo quvpsoduat
Suiag sv padiaoasas uaag savy ing, magi 01 asuvaajas fo
sansst ut pajuasasdas Gaimiudosddy asp sdnosd tupunuog

épepnpxe ro payuasaidar zspun dnoid ueurwop eyi
st ‘sdnoi@ [je 07 yuouTIIed Inq ‘sdnoz3 yeururop-uoU
YA poyeroosse Ajjeutrou SIX9TUOD UT [UOISN]OXe
JO UOdl}B}UsSa1dal JapuN jeuoI}daaxq ¢q

 

JUDAH ADMIUIGN Pepnjout JAD SEnOs8 JUDULULOP-LONT

épepnpxe
Jo paquaserdar zepun sdnoiZ yueurwop vou ary
:UOISN|OX 10 UOIJejUssSeAde1 JepUl, ZG

 

iGanba sasvasous siqg daaauagm sdnos8 upuruop-uou

eApueryrp poyean sdnoZ yueurwop pue

‘sdnos8 10g 01 juausyvad
audps ayy apiaosd 01 supa
astaap ‘uagy ‘Aqoapiarg p suit
-uinu sig mog puv sdnows
JUDUIULOP-uOU pup jupunUOp
(fo shaquiaus fo Juaueqvady
juasalfip 01 spray ies
panpunis agqnop agi Kfiruapy
aGuaselfip

gun pap sdnos8 jupusuop

fupunuop “UOu ay

spiepueys

(stoy10 Suouwre)

snyeqs Yeo}
UOTIEDOT

peoryder3oer

UOTIETUSTIO [enKeS

uorsty

ay

ose)

Sse[D)

AIDIUYAY /298Y

Aumqesiq

qopuary

 

 

 

qesodoid yoreasoy ¢ | pur suvurumop fo ssaqguiaus 01 1uauuspad] auaps ag] aplaodgy | YueUTUIOp UOU aIy :pPAeBpueys BIGqnNOp LieBAG Ld 3siqnop bulsy - d
LN3IN314 AdAL AHOYVYsIH
HOuVvasay NOLLNIOS WATEOUd 40 SUNN INI1G0Ud NIV 4O AdAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

yoieeseay 10)
WYOMIAINVYA F744 SVid AHL

 
 

References

Abberley, P. (1997). The concept of oppression and the development of a social theory of disability.
In L. Barton & M. Oliver (Eds.), Disability Studies: Past present and future (pp. 160-178):
Leeds: The Disability Press.

Adkins, L. (1995). Gendered work: Sexuality, famtly and the labour market. Buckingham: Open

University Press.

Agassi, J. B. (1989). Theories of gender equality: Lessons from the Israeli Kibbutz. Gender and
Society, 3(2), 160-186.

Albrecht, G. L., Seelman, K. D., & Bury, M. (Eds.). (2001). Handbook of Disability Studies,
London: Sage.

Anzaldua, G. (Ed.). (1990). Making face, making soul. Haciendo caras. Creative and critical
perspectives by feminists of color. San Francisco: aunt lute foundation book.

Arrighi, B. A., & Maume, D. J. (2000). Workplace subordination and men's avoidance of
housework. Journal of Family Issues, 21(4), 464-487.

Asch, A. (2001). Disability, bioethics, and human rights. In G. L. Albrecht, K. D. Seelman & M.
Bury (Eds.), Handbook of disability studies (pp. 297-326). London: Sage.

Bach, M. (2002). Social inclusion as solidarity: Rethinking the child rights agenda. Toronto: Laidlaw
Foundation.

Bach, M., & Burke, M. A. (2002). Toward an inclusive approach to monitoring investments and
outcomes in child development and learning. North York: The Rocher Institute.

Bakker, I. (1998). Unpaid Work and Macroeconomics: New Discussions, New Tools for Action.
Ottawa: Status of Women Canada.

Bamshad, M. J., & Olson, S. E. (2003). Does race exist? Scientific American.

Barker, C. (2005). In the shadow of cultural imperialism: Television and national identities in
the era of globalization. In M. Romero & E. Margolis (Eds.), The Blackwell Companion to
social inequalities (pp. 502-522). Malden MA: Blackwell Publishing.

Barnes, C. (1992). Disabling imagery and the media. an exploration of the principles for media
representations of disabled people. Halifax: British Council of Organisations of Disabled People
and Ryburn Publ. Ltd.

Barnes, C. (1996). Theories of Disability and the Origins of the Oppression of Disabled People
in Western Society. In L. Barton (Ed.), Disability and society: Emerging issues and insights
(pp. 43-60). London and New York: Longman.

Barnes, C., & Mercer, G. (Eds.). (1996). Exploring the divide: Hlness and disability: Leeds: The
Disability Press.
56

References

 

Basen, G., Eichler, M., & Lippman, A. (1993). Misconceptions. The social construction of choice and
the New Reproductive and Genetic Technologies, Vol. 1 (Vol. 1). Hull: Voyageur.

Basen, G., Eichler, M., & Lippman, A. (1994). Misconceptions. The social construction of choice and
the New Reproductive and Genetic Technologies, Vol. 2 (Vol. 2). Maple Pond: Voyageur.

Baxter, J. (1997). Gender equality and participation in housework: A cross-national perspective.
Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 28(3), 220-247.

Benéria, L., & Roldén, M. (1987). The crossroads of class and gender: Industrial homework, subcon-
tracting, and household dynamics in Mexico City. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bergum, N. (1996). General practitioners’ role in shaping disabled women's lives. In C. Barnes
& G. Mercer (Eds.), Exploring the divide (pp. 157-172): Leeds: The Disability Press.

Bhaynani, K.-K. (1993). Talking racism and the editing of Women's Studies. In D. Richardson
& V. Robinson (Eds.), Latroducing Women's Studies, feminist theory and practice (pp. 27-48).
London: Macmillan.

Bhavnani, K.-K. (Ed.). (2001). Feminism and ‘Race’. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bittman, M., England, P, Sayer, L., Folbre, N., & Matheson, G. (2003). When does gender

trump money? Bargaining and time in household work. American Journal of Soctology, 1091),
186 - 214.

Blasiotti, E. L., Westbrook, J. D., & Kobayashi, I. (2001). Disability Studies and electronic
networking. In G. L. Albrecht, K. D. Seelman & M. Bury (Eds.), Handbook of Disability
Studies (pp. 327-347). London: Sage.

Blim, M. (2005). Equality and economy: The global challenge. Toronto: Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers, Inc. and Altamira Press.

Brett, P. J., Graham, K., & Smythe, C. (1995). An analysis of specialty journals on alcohol, drugs
and addictive behaviors for sex bias in research methods and reporting. Journal of Studies on
Alcohol, 56(1), 24-34.

Budlender, D., & Brathaug, A. L. (2004). Calculating the value of unpaid labour in South Africa.
Atlantis, 28(2), 29-40.

Burke, Mary Anne. 1995. Child Institutionalisation and Child Protection in Central and Eastern
Europe, Innocenti Occasional Paper EPS 52, Florence, Italy: UNICEF Innocenti Research
Centre,.

— 1999. “Developing Gender-based Analysis (GBA) Tools for the Health Sector", in Health in
the Commonwealth Sharing Solutions 1999/2000, London: Kensington Publications Limited
for the Commonwealth Secretariat.

— 1999. "Health Canada's Achievements to Date in Mainstreaming Gender", in Proceedings
from the Commonwealth Workshop on Gender Management Systems for the Health Sector,
St. Kitt's and Nevis. London: Commonwealth Secretariat,.

— 1999."Gender Management System for the Health Sector in Canada", in Proceedings from
the Commonwealth Workshop on Gender Management Systems for the Health Sector,
St. Kitt's and Nevis. London: Commonwealth Secretariat.

Burke, M. A., & de Francisco, A. (Eds.). (2004). Monitoring financial flows for health research
(Vol. 2). Geneva: Global Forum for Health Research.

Burke, M. A., & de Francisco, A. (Eds.). (2005). Monitoring financial flows for health research:
Behind the global numbers. Geneva.: Global Forum for Health Research,,.

Burke, M. A., Pegg, S., Taylor, K., Mykitiuk, R., Tremain, S., & Bach, M. (2003). The construction
of disability and risk in genetic counselling discourse. Toronto: Rocher Institute.

Canadian Down Syndrome Society. (2003). Redefining Down Syndrome. Position Statement on
Redefining Down Syndrome. Retrieved Dec. 4, 2004, 2004, from
http://www.cdss.ca/PSonDefDS.html
References

57

 

Chandler, W. (1994). The value of household work in Canada, 1992. Canadian Economic
Observer, 3.1-3.9.

Chen, W., & Wellman, B. (2005). Minding the cyber-gap: the Internet and social inequality.
In M. Romero & E. Margolis (Eds.), The Blackwell Companion to social inequalities (pp. 523-
545). Malden MA: Blackwell Publ.

Commonwealth Secretariat. (1999). .A quick guide to gender mainstreaming in the public service.
London, U.K.: Commonwealth Secretariat.

Davis, L. (1995). Enforcing normalcy: Disability, deafness and the body: London: Verso.

Deal, M. (2003). Disabled people's attitudes toward other impairment groups: a hierarchy of
impairments. Disability and Society, 18(7), 897-910.

Dei, G. J. S$. (2000). Towards an anti-racism discursive framework. In G. J. S. Dei & A. Calliste
(Eds.), Power, knowledge and anti-racism education. A critical reader (pp. 23-40). Halifax:
Fernwood.

Denzin, N. K. (2005). Selling images of inequality: Hollywood cinema and the reproduction of
racial and gender stereotypes. In M. Romero & E. Margolis (Eds.), The Blackwell Companion
to social inequalities (pp. 496-501). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publ.

des Riviéres-Pigeon, C., Saurel-Cubizolles, M.-J., & Romito, P. (2002). Division of domestic
work and psychological distress one year after childbirth: A comparison between France,
Quebec and Italy. Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 12, 397-409.

Desai, S., & Johnson, K. (2005). Women's decisionmaking and child health: Familial and social
hierarchies. Calverton, MD USA: ORC Macro.

DPI Solihull Declaration. (2000). The right to live and be different. Retrieved Dec. 6, 2004, 2004,
from http://www.daa.org.uk/DPL Declaration. htm.

Dua, E. (1999). Beyond Diversity: Exploring the Ways in Which the Discourse of Race has
Shaped the Institution of the Nuclear Family. In E. Dua (Ed.), Scratching the surface: Canadian
anti-racist feminist thought (pp. 237-260). Toronto: Women's Press.

Eichler, M. (1980). The double standard. A feminist critique of feminist social science. London:
Croom Helm.

Eichler, M. (1984). Sexism in Research and its Policy Implications. In J. M. Vickers (Ed.), Taking
Sex into Account: The Policy Consequences of Sexist Research (pp. 17-39). Ottawa: Carleton
University Press.

Eichler, M. (1985). And the work never ends. Feminist contributions. Canadian Review of
Sociology and Anthropology, 22(5), 619-644.

Eichler, M. (1988). Families in Canada Today: Recent Changes and Their Policy Implications
(2"4 ed.). Toronto: Gage.

Eichler, M. (1989). The elusive ideal - defining equality. In W. Pentney & D. Proulx (Eds.),
Canadian Human Rights Yearbook 1988 (pp. 167-188). Ottawa: Les Presses de l'Université
d'Ottawa.

Eichler, M. (1991). Nonsexist research methods. A practical guide. New York: Routledge.

Eichler, M. (1994). Reflections on the "Temporary use of normal functioning uteri". In G. Basen,
M. Eichler & A. Lippman (Eds.), Misconceptions. The social construction of choice and the new
reproductive and genetic technologies (Vol. 2, pp. 193-215). Maple Pond: Voyageur Publishing.

Eichler, M. (1997a). Family shifis. Families, policies and gender equality. Don Mills: Oxford

University Press.
Eichler, M. (1997b). Feminist Methodology. Current Sociology, 45(2), 9-36.
Eichler, M. (Ed.). (1995). Change of plans. Towards a non-sexist sustainable city. Toronto:

Garamond Press.
58

References

 

Eichler M.,& Burke M.A. The BIAS FREE framework: A new analytical tool for global health
research. Can J Public Health 2006;97 (1):63-68.

Eichler, M., Larkin, J., & Neysmith, $. M. (Eds.). (2002). Feminist utopias. Re-vistoning our futures.
Toronto: Inanna Publications and Education Inc.

Eichler, M., Reisman, A. L., & Borins, E. M. (1992). Gender bias in medical research. Women
and Therapy, 12(4), 61-70.

Eichler, M. e. a. (2002). Zu mehr Gleichberechtigung zwischen den Geschlechtern: Erkennen und
Vermeiden von Gender Bias in der Gesundheitsforschung. Deutsche Bearbeitung eines vom
kanadischen Gesundheitsministerium herausgegebenen Handbuchs. Berlin: Berliner Zentrum
Public Health.

Essed, P. (1991). Understanding Everyday Racism. An Interdisciplinary Theory. Newbury Park: Sage.

Evans, T., Chen, L., Evans, D., Sadana, R., Stilwell, B., Travis, P, et al. (2006). The world health
report 2006 - working together for health. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Fagan, C., & Hebson, G. (2006). ‘Making work pay' debates from a gender perspective. A comparative
review of some recent policy reforms in thirty European countries. Luxemburg: European
Commission, Directorate-General for Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities,
Unit G.1.

Farmer, P. (1997). Social scientists and the new tuberculosis. Secial Science and Medicine,
44(3), 347-358.

Ferrie, J. E., Shipley, M. J., Davey Smith, G., Stansfeld, S. A., & Marmot, G. M. (2002). Change
in health inequalities among British civil servants: the Whitehall II Study. Journal of

Epidemiology and Community Health (56), 922-926.

Fine, M., Weis, L., Powell, L. C., & Wong, L. M. (Eds.). (1997). Off White: Readings on race,
power, and society. New York: Routledge.

Fleischman, J. (2002). Suffering In silence: The links between human rights abuses and HIV.
New York: Human Rights Watch.

Folbre, N. (2001). The invisible heart. Economics and family values. New York: New Press.

Frazee, C., Gilmour, J., Mykitiuk, R., & Bach, M. (2002). The legal regulation and construction of
the gendered body and of disability in Canadian health law and policy. Toronto: Rocher Institute.

Gaertner, S. L., Dovidio, J. F, Banker, B. S., Rust, M. C., Niet, J. A., Mottola, G. R., et al. (1997).
Does white racism necessarily mean antiblackness? Aversive racism and prowhiteness.
In M. Fine, L. Weis, L. C. Powell & L. M. Wong (Eds.), Off White. Readings on race, power,
and society (pp. 167-178). New York: Routledge.

Garcia-Moreno, C., & France, N. (2001). Violence against women and HIV/AIDS: Setting the
Research Agenda Meeting Report Geneva, 23-25 October 2000. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Gartner, A., Lipinsky, D. K., & Turnbull, A. P (1991). Supporting families with a child with a
disability. An international outlook. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing.

Geiger, H. J. (2003). Racial and ethnic disparities in diagnosis and treatment: A review of the
evidence and a consideration of causes. In B. D. Smedley, A. Y. Stith, A. R. Nelson, Committee
on Understanding and Eliminating Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care, Board on
Health Sciences Policy & I. 0. M. 0. t. N. Academies (Eds.), Unequal treatment. Confronting
racial and ethnic disparities in health care (pp. 415-454). Washington, D.C.: National

Academies Press.

Gliedman, J., & Roth, W. (1980). The unexpected minority. Handicapped children in America.

New York: Harcourt, Brace and Janovich.

Groce, N. E., Chamie, M., & Me, A. (1999). Measuring the quality of Life: Rethinking the World
Bank's Disability Adjusted Life Years. International Journal of Educational Research, 49, 1-2.
References

59

 

Gustafson, D. L. (2004). Understanding women and health. In N. Mandell (Ed.), Feminist issues:
Race, class and sexuality (4 ed., pp. 266-286). Toronto: Pearson.

Gustafson, D. L. (2005). Transcultural Nursing Theory from a critical cultural perspective.
Advances in Nursing Science, 28(1), 2-16.

Harding, S. (1986). The science question in feminism Ithaca. NY: Cornell University Press.

Harding, S., & Hintikka, M. B. (Eds.). (1983). Discovering reality. Feminist perspectives on episte-
mology, metaphysics, methodology, and philosophy of science. Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel Co.

Haslam, N. L., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2000). Essentialist beliefs about social categories.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 391), 113-127.

Hasle, H., Clemmensen, I. H., & Mikkelsen, M. (2000). Risks of leukaemia and solid tumours
in individuals with Down's syndrome. Lancet(355), 165-169.

Health Canada. (1999). Health Canada's Women's Health Strategy. Ottawa: Minister of Public
Works and Government Services.

Heggenhougen, H. K., Hackethal, V., Vivel, P., & Sen, P. (2003). Gender relations and the special
roles of women in malaria risk and control. In H. K. Heggenhougen, V. Hackethal & P. Vivel
(Eds.), The behavioural and social aspects of malaria and its control. An introduction and

annotated bibliography. n.p.: UNDP/World Bank/World Health Organization.

Heiskanen, M., Aromaa, K., Niemi, H., Ruusinen, A., & Siren, R. (1991). Accidents and Violence
1988. Helsinki: Central Statistical Office of Finland.

Henry, FE, Tator, C., Mattis, W., & Rees, T. (2000). The ideology of racism. In The colour of

democracy. Racism in Canadian society (pp. 15-34). Toronto: Harcourt and Brace Canada.
Herschberger, R. (1948). Adam's Rib (1970 ed.). New York: Harper and Row.

Hess, B. B., & Ferree, M. M. (1987). Analyzing gender. A handbook of social science research.
Newbury Park,CA: Sage.

Hochschild, A. R. (1989). The second shift: Working parents and the revolution at home. New York:
Viking.

Human Rights Watch. (2006). The Rwandan genocide: How it was prepared: A Human Rights
Watch Briefing Paper (No. 1).

Hurtado, A., & Stewart, A. J. (1997). Through the Looking Glass: Implications of Studying
Whiteness for Feminist Methods. In M. Fine, L. Weis, L. C. Powell & L. M. Wong (Eds.),
Off White. Readings on Race, Power, and Society (pp. 297-311). New York: Routledge.

Ironmonger, D. (1996). Counting outputs, capital inputs and caring labour: Estimating Gross
Household Product. Feminist Economics, 2(3), 37-64.

Jhappan, R. (1996). Post-modern race and gender essentialism or a post-mortem of scholarship.
Studies in Political Economy, 1996(51), 15-63.
Johnson, C. A. (2004). Choosing people: the role of social capital in information seeking

behaviour. Paper 201 Available at http://InformationR.net/ir/10-1/paper201.html. Znformation
Research, 10(1).

Jones, M., & Basser Marks, L. (2001). Law and people with disabilities. In N. Smesler & P. Baltes
(Eds.), Lnternational Encyclopedia of Social and Behavioral Sciences: Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Keller, E. E (1985). Reflections on gender and science. New Haven and London: Yale University

Press.

Keller, E. F, & Longino, H. E. (Eds.). (1996). Feminism and Science. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Kenya, Office of the President, & Gender and HIV/AIDS Technical Subcommittee of the Natio-
nal AIDS Control Council. (2002). Mainstreaming gender into the Kenya national HIV/AIDS
strategic plan 2000-2005. Nairobi: Kenya. Office of the President.
60 References

 

Klein, J. (1997). Wie Frauen sprachlich benachteiligt werden - and was frau/man dagegen tun
kann. In E. de Soltelo (Ed.), Frauen in Oeffentlichkett, Beruf und Familie. (pp. 173-180).
Muenster: Lit Verlag.

Kmictowicz, Z. (2001, April 7). Down's children received "less favourable" hospital treatment’.
Retrieved January 28, 2006, from

http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0999/is_7290_322/ai_74089353
Kolip, P., & Hurrelmann, K. (2004). Gechlecht - Gesundheit - Krankheit: Eine Einfuehrung. In

K. Hurrelmann & P. Kolip (Eds.), Geschlecht, Gesundheit und Krankheit. Maenner und Frauen
im Vergleich (pp. 13-31). Bern: Verlag Hand Huber.

Lampieri, J. A., Poulos, C., Cropper, M. L., Mitiku, H., & Whittington, D. (1999). Gender and
preferences for malaria prevention in Tigray, Ethiopia (Policy Research Report on Gender and
Development. Working Paper Series No. 3). n.p.: Washington: The World Bank, Develop-
ment Research Group/Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network.

Lapointe, J., & Eichler, M. (1985). Le traitement objectif des sexes dans la recherche. Ottawa: Conseil
des recherches en sciences humaines.

Lenski, G. E. (1984). Power and privilege: A theory of social stratification. Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press.

Leo, R. (2001). Gender bias in psychiatric textbooks. Psychiatric Times, 18.

Levin, R. I. (2005). The puzzle of Aspirin and sex. New England Journal of Medicine(352),
1366-1368.

Lewis, S. (2006). Speech to a conference on UN Reform and Human Rights. February 25, 2006.
http://www.stephenlewisfoundation.org/news_item.cfm?news=748.

Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. (1999). Guideline for the analysis of gender & health.
Liverpool: Department for International Development.

Lollar, D. J. (2001). Public health trends in disability. In G. L. Albrecht, K. D. Seelman & M.
Bury (Eds.), Handbook of Disability Studies (pp. 754-771). London: Sage.

Longino, H. (1993). Essential tensions - phase two: Feminist, philosophical, and social studies

of science. In L. M. Antony & C. Witt (Eds.), A Mind of One's Own: Feminist Essays on Reason
and Objectivity (pp. 257-272). Boulder: Westview Press.

Lupton, D. (1994). Medicine as culture: Illness, disease and the body in western societies. London: Sage.

MacFarlane, A. (2004). Disability and Ageing. In J. Swain, S. French, C. Barnes & C. Thomas
(Eds.), Disabling barriers - enabling environments (2 ed., pp. 189-194). London: Sage.

Major, B. (1993). Gender, entitlement, and the distribution of family labor. Journal of Social Issues,
49, 141-159.

Mann, J., Gruskin, S., Grodin, M. A., & Annas, G. J. (1999). Health and human rights: A reader.
New York: Routledge.

Manzi, FE, Mbuyita, S., & Urassa, H. (2003). Development of a standardized exemption mechanism
for Kilombero District, Tanzania. Unpublished manuscript, Dar-es-Salaam.

March, C., Smyth, I., & Mukhopadhyay, M. (1999). A guide to gender-analysis frameworks.
Oxford: Oxfam.

Marx, K., & Engels, F. (1932). The German ideology. Moscow: The Marx-Engels Institute.

Matlin, S. (2004). Foreword. In Global Forum for Health Research (Ed.), Mental and neurological
health and the millennium development goals. Geneva: Global Forum for Health Research.

Mbuyita, S. (2005). The importance of routine inclusion of gender analysis in all stages of the research
process: A case study of an analysis of a final report on the development of a Standardized Exemption
Mechanism for Kilombero District, Tanzania. Paper presented at the Poverty, Equity and Health

Research: Final documents from Forum 9, Mumbai, India.
References

61

 

McClintock, A. (1995a). Imperial leather. Race, gender, and sexuality in the colonial contest.
New York: Routledge.

McClintock, A. (1995b). The lay of the land. Genealogies of imperialism. In mperial Leather.
Race, Gender and Sexuality in the Colonial Contest (pp. 22-65). New York: Routledge.

McLaren, A. (1990). Our own master race. Eugenics in Canada, 1885-1945. Toronto: McClellan
and Stewart.

Messing, K. (1998). One-eyed science. Occupational health and women workers. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.

Messing, K., Punnett, L., Bond, M., Alexanderson, K., Pyle, J., Zahm, S., et al. (2004). Be the
fairest of them all: Challenges and recommendations for the treatment of gender in occupational
health research. Unpublished manuscript, Montreal.

Mohanty, C. T., Russo, A., & Torres, L. (Eds.). (1991). Third world women and the politics of
feminism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Morawski, J. G. (1997). White experimenters, white blood, and other white conditions: Locating
the psychologists’ race. In M. Fine, L. Weis, L. C. Powell & L. M. Wong (Eds.), Off White.
Readings on race, power, and society (pp. 11-28). New York: Routledge.

Morris, J. (1991). Pride against prejudice: Transforming attitudes to disability. London: Women's Press.

Munck, R. (2005). Social exclusion: New inequality paradigm for the era of globalization?
In M. Romero & E. Margolis (Eds.), The Blackwell Companion of social inequalities
(pp. 31-49). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publ.

Murphy, Y., & Murphy, R. E (1974). Women of the forest. New York: Columbia University Press.

O'Brien, M. (1981). The politics of reproduction. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Oliver, M. (1996). Understanding disability: From theory to practice. London: MacMillan.

O'Neil, T., & Piron, L.-H. (2003). Rights-based approaches to tackling discrimination and horizontal
inequality. Background paper. http://www.odi.org.uk/pppg/activities/country_level/mic/works-
hop/Rights_and_Discrimination_Background_Paper.pdf, Washington: Overseas Develop-
ment Institute, Poverty and public policy group.

Ouellette-Kuntz, H., Garcin, N., & Lewis, S. (2004). Addressing health disparities through
promoting equity for individuals with intellectual disability. A synthesis paper written in
conjunction with the International Think Tank on Reducing Health Disparities and
Promoting Equity for Vulnerable Populations, Sept. 21-23, 2003. Ottawa.

Peat, M. (1997). Attitudes and access: Advancing the rights of people with disabilities. Canadian
Medical Association Journal(156), 657-659.

Peck, P. (2005). Aspirin won't prevent 1° heart attack in women. Retrieved June 11, 2005, from
http://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/art.asp?articlekey=46 164

Pfohl, S. (2005). New global technologies of power: Cybernetic capitalism and social inequality.
In M. Romero & E. Margolis (Eds.), The Blackwell Companion to social inequalities
(pp. 546-592). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publ.

Physicians’ Health Study Website. (2005). Physicians; Health Study 1. Retrieved June 11, 2005,
from http://phs.bwh.harvard.edu/phs].htm

Plato. (1986). Charmides, from http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/charmides.html

Ravaud, J.-E, & Stiker, H.-J. (2001). Inclusion/exclusion: An analysis of historical and cultural
meanings. In G. L. Albrecht, K. D. Seelman & M. Bury (Eds.), Handbook of Disability Studies
(pp. 490-512). London: Sage.

Ridker, P M., Cook, N. R., L-M., L., Gordon, D., Gaziano, J. M., Manson, J. E., et al. (2005).
A randomized trial of low-dose Aspirin in the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease

in women. New England Journal of Medicine(352), 1293-1304.
62

References

 

Rioux, M. (2003). On second thought: Constructing knowledge, law, disability and inequality.
In S. Herr, L. Gostin & H. Koh (Eds.), Human rights and persons with intellectual disabilities:
Different but equal. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Rioux, M. H., Crawford, C., Ticoll, M., & Bach, M. (1997). Uncovering the shape of violence:
a research methodology rooted in the experience of people with disabilities. In C. Barnes &

G. Mercer (Eds.), Doing disability research (pp. 190-206). Leeds: The Disability Press.

Rocher Institute, T. (1996). Disability Community and Society. Exploring the Links. Toronto:
The Roeher Institute.

Ross, C. E. (1987). The division of labor at home. Social Forces, 65(3), 816-833.

Rossides, D. W. (1997). Social stratification: The interplay of class, race, and gender. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Rothman, R. A. (1993). Inequality and stratification: Class, color, race, and gender. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. (1996). Gathering Strength (Vol. 3). Ottawa: Minister
of Supply and Services Canada.

Rushton, J. P. (1991). Mongoloid-caucasoid differences in brain size from military samples.

Intelligence, 15, 351-359.

Rushton, J. P. (1992). Cranial capacity related to sex, rank and race in a stratified random sample
of 6325 U.S. military personnel. Intelligence, 16, 401-413.

Rushton, J. P. (2000). Race, evolution, and behavior: A life history perspective (2nd special abridged
ed. ed.). Port Huron, MI: Charles Darwin Research Institute.

Sage, N. A. (2005). Elements of a research study:
http://www.psy.pdx.edu/PsyTutor/Tutorials/Research/Elements/.

Sanchez, L. (1993). Women's power and the gendered division of domestic labor in the Third
World. Gender and Society, 7(3), 434-459.

Schilling, C. (2003). The body and social thought (2"4 ed.). London: Sage.

Schriner, K. (2001). A Disability Studies perspective on employment issues and policies for

disabled people. In G. L. Albrecht, K. D. Seelman & M. Bury (Eds.), Handbook of Disability
Studies (pp. 642-662). London: Sage.

Seymour-Smith, $., & Wetherell, M. (2006). ‘What he hasn't told you ...': Investigating the
micro-politics of gendered support in heterosexual couples' co-constructed accounts of illness.

Feminism and Psychology, 16(1), 105-127.
Shakespeare, T., & Watson, N. (1996). ‘The body controversy’: A new direction for Disability Studies?
Hull.

Shakespeare, T., & Watson, N. (2001). Making the difference: Disability, politics, and recognition.
In G. L. Albrecht, K. D. Seelman & M. Bury (Eds.), Handbook of Disability Studies. London:
Sage.

Shambley-Ebron, D. Z., & Boyle, J. S. (2006). Self-care and mothering in African-American
women with HIV/AIDS. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 28(1), 42-60.

Sherman, J. A., & Beck, E. T. (1979). The prism of sex. Essays in the sociology of knowledge. Madison:

University of Wisconsin Press.
Shiva, V. (1997). Biopiracy. The plunder of nature and knowledge. Toronto: Between the lines.
Shookner, M. (2002). An Inclusion Lens: Workbook for looking at social and economic exclusion

and inclusion. Dalhousie: Population Health Research Unit, Dalhousie University, for the
Population and Public Health Branch, Atlantic Regional Office, Health Canada.

Sims, A. (2005). Ecological debt. The health of the planet and the wealth of nations. Fortescue,
Sidmouth, UK: Pluto Press.
References

63

 

Smedley, B. D., Stith, A. ¥., Nelson, A. R., Committee on Understanding and Eliminating Racial
and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care, Board on Health Sciences Policy, & Academies,
Io. M. 0. t. N. (Eds.). (2003). Unequal treatment. Confronting racial and ethnic disparities
in health care. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

Smith, L. T. (1999). Decolonizing Methodologies. Research and Indigenous Peoples. London and
New York: Zed Books.

Smith, R. W., Markusen, E., & Lifton, R. J. (1995). Professional ethics and the denial of Armenian
genocide. Holocaust and Genocide Studies, 91), 1-22.

South Africa. (2004). Selected issues IMF Country Report No.4/379: Washington: International
Monetary Fund.
Spender, D. (1980). Man made language. Boston: Routledge

Spivak, G. (1996). Subaltern studies. Deconstructing historiography. In D. Landry & G. Maclean
(Eds.), the Spivak Reader (pp. 203-235). New York: Routledge.

Stager, E. (2004). From multiculturalism to the intersections of diversity. Canadian Diversity,
3(1), 21 - 22.

Status of Women Canada. (1996). Gender-based analysis. A guide for policy-making. Ottawa: Status
of Women Canada.

Sydie, R. A. (1987). Natural women, cultured men. A feminist perspective on sociological theory.
Toronto: Methuen.

Tapper, M. (1999). In the blood: Sickle cell anemia and the politics of race. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.

Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P, Gruenewald, T. L., Gurung, R. A. R., & Updegraff,
J. A. (2000). Biobehavioral responses to stress in females: Tend-and-befriend, not fight-or-
flight. Psychological Review, 107(3), 411-429.

Theobald, S$. (2002). Gendered bodies: Recruitment, management and occupational health in
Northern Thailand's electronics factories. Women and Health, 35(4), 7-26.

Thomson, R. G. (2002). Integrating disability, transforming feminist theory. NWSA Journal,
14(3), 1-32.

Tomlinson, M. (1999). The learning economy and embodied knowledge flows" (Feb 1999) No 26.
Manchester: Centre for Research on Innovation and Competition, University of Manchester.

Tomm, W. (1989). The effects of feminist approaches on research methodologies. Waterloo: Wilfred

Laurier University Press.

Trahan, J. (2006). Genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity: A topical digest of the case law
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. New York: Human Rights
Watch.

Trewartha, R. (1989). What your dreams make you. New internationalist(201).
Turek, M. (2000). Gender and equity: Relationship to heart health. Paper presented at the First

International Conference on Women, Heart Disease and Stroke: Victoria, British Columbia,
Canada.
UNICEE (2005). Children and disability in transition. Florence: UNICEE.

United Nations. (1948). Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html, accessed 03/08/2006.

United Nations Development Programme. (1998). Human Development Report 1998. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Ustiin T. B. (2006). JCF Definition of Disability & Health, WHO Classifications & Terminology,

WHO Geneva, PowerPoint presentation at WHO Meeting on Disability Terminology and
Data, WHO Geneva 27 - 28 July 2006.
64

References

 

Waites, G. M. H. (2003). Development of methods of male contraception: Impact of the World
Health Organization Task Force. Fertility and Stertlity, 80(1), 1-15.

Waring, M. (1988a). Counting for nothing: What men value and what women are worth. Wellington:
Allen & Unwin Port Nicholson Press.

Waring, M. (1988b). f/ Women counted. A New Feminist Economics. New York: Harper and Row.

Warren, K. J. (1987). Feminism and ecology: Making connections. Environmental Ethics, 9(1),
3-20.

Warren, K. J. (1993a). Introduction. In M. E. Zimmerman, J. B. Callicott, G. Sessions, K. J.
Warren & J. Clark (Eds.), Environmental philosophy. From animal rights to radical ecology
(pp. 252-267). Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.

Warren, K. J. (1993b). The power and promise of ecological feminism. In M. E. Zimmerman,
J. B. Callicott, G. Sessions, K. J. Warren & J. Clark (Eds.), Environmental philosophy. From
animal rights to radical ecology (pp. 320-341). Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.

Weber, M. (1977 [1949]). “Objectivity” in social science and social policy. In F. Dallmayr and
T. McCarthy (Eds.), Understanding and Social Inquiry (pp. 24-37). Notre Dame: University

of Notre Dame Press.

Weber, M. (1992). “Cranial capacity and IQ", from Vol. 32, 04-01-1992, pp 275. Mankind
Quarterly, 32.

Weitz, E. D. (2003). A century of genocide: Utopias of race and nation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton

University Press,.

Wolbring, G. (2001). Folgen der Anwendung genetischer Diagnostik fuer behinderte Menschen:
Enquete- Kommission des deutschen Bundestages: Recht und Ethik der modernen
Medizin. (Consequences of the application of genetic diagnostics for disabled people: Expert opinion
for the Study Commission on the Law and Ethics of Modern Medicine of the German
Bundestag).

http://www.bundestag.de/parlament/gremien/kommissionen/archiv1 4/medi/medi_gut_wol.pdf,
accessed 24.01.06.

World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/healthinfo/boddaly/en/, accessed 24.01.06.
World Health Organization. (1948). Constitution of the World Health Organization, at

http://policy.who.int/cgi-bin/om_isapi.dll?hitsperheading=on &infobase=basicdoc&record
={21}&softpage=Document42, accessed 03/08/2006.

World Health Organization. (1986). The Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion, at
http://www.who.int/ healthpromotion/conferences/previous/ottawa/en/index.html!

World Health Organization. (2000). Women's mental health. An evidence based review. Geneva:
World Health Organization.

World Health Organization. (2006). Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Geneva:
World Health Organization.

World Health Organization - Dept. of Gender Women and Health. (2004a). Gender in lung

cancer and smoking research. Geneva: World Health Organization.

World Health Organization - Dept. of Gender Women and Health. (2004b). Gender in mental
health research. Geneva: World Health Organization.

World Health Organization - Dept. of Gender Women and Health. (2004c). Gender in tuberculosis

research. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Yoder, R. (1989). Are people willing and able to pay for health services? Social Science and
Medicine, 29, 35-42.

Zuo, J., & Bian, Y. (2001). Gender resources, division of housework and perceived fairness -
A case in urban China. Journal of Marriage & the Family, 63, 1122 - 1133.
