Vote Buying and Social Desirability Bias:
Experimental Evidence from Nicaragua

Ezequiel Gonzalez-Ocantos University of Notre Dame
Chad Kiewiet de Jonge University of Notre Dame

Carlos Meléndez University of Notre Dame

Javier Osorio University of Notre Dame

David W. Nickerson University of Notre Dame

Qualitative studies of vote buying find the practice to be common in many Latin American countries, but quantitative

studies using surveys find little evidence of vote buying. Social desirability bias can account for this discrepancy. We employ
a survey-based list experiment to minimize the problem. After the 2008 Nicaraguan municipal elections, we asked about
vote-buying behavior by campaigns using a list experiment and the questions traditionally used by studies of vote buying on
a nationally representative survey. Our list experiment estimated that 24% of registered voters in Nicaragua were offered
a gift or service in exchange for votes, whereas only 2% reported the behavior when asked directly. This detected social
desirability bias is nonrandom and analysis based on traditional obtrusive measures of vote buying is unreliable. We also

provide systematic evidence that shows the importance of monitoring strategies by parties in determining who is targeted

for vote buying.

lientelistic electoral linkages are characterized by

a transaction of political favors in which politi-

cians offer immediate material incentives to cit-
izens or groups in exchange for electoral support.! Vote
buying, which is a more particularized form of clien-
telism involving the exchange of goods for votes at the
individual level (Stokes 2007), has generated numerous
ethnographies and surveys to measure its incidence and
test-related hypotheses. While qualitative research rou-
tinely finds vote buying to be pervasive in the developing
world (e.g., Auyero 2001), individual-level surveys often
uncover low levels of such exchanges (e.g., Transparency

International 2004). If respondents are reluctant to ad-
mit to receiving gifts in exchange for votes, then surveys
could systematically understate the amount of vote buy-
ing. Moreover, if this measurement error is nonrandom,
then empirical results about the dynamics of vote buying
derived from surveys are on a shaky foundation. This ar-
ticle uses a survey experiment to lessen social desirability
bias, describe whom campaigns targeted with vote buy-
ing in an election, and demonstrate that this measurement
error is nonrandom.

The academic consensus is that the exchange of gifts
and favors for votes has deleterious consequences for

 

Ezequiel Gonzalez-Ocantos is a Ph.D. candidate in Political Science, 217 O'Shaughnessy Hall, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
IN 46556 (egonzal4@nd.edu). Chad Kiewiet de Jonge is a Ph.D. candidate in Political Science, 217 O’Shaughnessy Hall, University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 (ckiewiet@nd.edu). Carlos Meléndez is a Ph.D. candidate in Political Science, 217 O'Shaughnessy
Hall, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 (cmelend1@nd.edu). Javier Osorio is a Ph.D. candidate in Political Science, 217
O’Shaughnessy Hall, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 (fosorioz@nd.edu). David W. Nickerson is Associate Professor of
Political Science, 217 O’Shaughnessy Hall, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 (dnickers@nd.edu).

The authors would like to thank Darren Davis, Fran Hagopian, Victoria Murillo, Anabella Expafia-Najera, Simeon Nichter, Ana de la O,
Maya Parson, Shannon Walsh, and Rebecca Weitz-Shapiro for generous feedback; Paul Avey, Robert Braithwaite, and Christopher Sullivan
for their collaboration in designing the survey; and Borge y Asociados for fielding the survey. Nickerson would like to thank the Center for
the Study of Democratic Politics at Princeton University for the time to write the article and the Dean of the College of Arts and Letters
at the University of Notre Dame for providing funds for the survey. Appendices and material for replicating the statistical analysis can be
found at www.nd.edu/~dnickers.

' Programmatic linkages, by contrast, are based on the promise of indirect benefits resulting from investment in public goods or on direct
benefits distributed by public bureaucracies according to standardized rules (Kitschelt 2000).

American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 56, No. 1, January 2012, Pp. 202-217

©2011, Midwest Political Science Association DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2011.00540.x

202

“OI Aoppuoo Kayum Krerquauyuoyssdny woss papeo[wmog | °Z OZ “LO6SOPS1

  

8
8
3
8
3
z
3
z
g
8
g
z
x
$
g
g
Pe
o
g
z
5.
z
=
2
@
G
g
s
3
s
8
8
&
2
&
=
z
z
a
zB
°
s
2:
g
2
3
g

 

asu20r] suOUIUIOD aageasD aiqeouidde aqp Kq pausanc8 a1e sajouue WO ‘asm Jo sama 4oy Kaesqe7] BULU KafiAA Wo (suONmUOD-puE-suMDIAUIOD’Ka[uM hae
VOTE BUYING AND SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

democracy.” Vote buying (and clientelism more generally)
shortens the time horizons of public policies, thereby gen-
erating development and poverty traps (Magaloni 2006);
inverts the rationale of vertical accountability, making
voters and not politicians subject to monitoring and con-
trol (Stokes 2005); and, when practiced primarily by those
in control of public monies, hinders the creation ofa level
and competitive political playing field. It is therefore im-
perative not only to study the causes, consequences, and
dynamics of vote buying, but also to estimate its perva-
siveness in any given polity.

Scholars have employed a number of methodological
approaches to studying vote buying. Most of the existing
knowledge on vote buying is based on qualitative ethnog-
raphies detailing the ways in which clients interact with
political brokers and how clients view such exchanges
(see Stokes 2007 for a review). Based on these studies,
the widely held assumption is that clientelistic electoral
linkages are pervasive, particularly but not exclusively,
in politics in the developing world (Kitschelt 2000) and
that the poor are the most likely targets of such strate-
gies. Although these studies have greatly increased our
understanding of the processes undergirding vote buying
in specific contexts, this qualitative literature is limited by
its inability to measure the extent of vote buying and test
competing theories about party macrostrategy.

In response to this disadvantage, some scholars have
used mass surveys to study vote buying. In stark contrast
to ethnographic studies, survey data often show that small
percentages of respondents report personally receiving a
good or favor from a political party when asked about
it directly (e.g., Transparency International 2004). For
example, Stokes (2005) finds that only 7% of Argentine
respondents reported receiving goods for their votes, even
though ethnographic work shows that vote buying is a key
component of modern Argentine politics (Auyero 2001;
Levitsky 2003). Most surveys reported single-digit vote-
buying rates, with those reporting double-digit rates re-
stricted to Southeast Asian democracies (Schaffer 2007).
These types of findings leave many scholars optimistic
about the low incidence of vote buying (e.g., Seligson
et al. 2006, 93). These data collected by surveys require
researchers to assume that measurement error in survey
items on vote buying is negligible or at least random.

To determine if respondents are targeted for vote
buying, researchers generally ask respondents directly
whether they have received a gift or favor from a po-
litical party or candidate. Survey items that ask about

Some authors have pointed to potential benefits of vote buying and
clientelism in institutionalizing political systems. See Huntington
(1968) and Philipson and Snyder (1996).

203

stigmatized or illegal attitudes or behaviors often pro-
duce social desirability bias, as many respondents wish
to present themselves in a favorable light to interviewers
(Bradburn et al. 1978; DeMaio 1984; Nadeau and Niemi
1995; Tourangeau and Yan 2007). Since vote buying is ille-
gal in most countries and generally associated with a neg-
ative social stigma due to its disjuncture with democratic
norms and association with poverty, items that directly
ask respondents about it are likely subject to significant
levels of measurement error.

Consequently, the use of direct, obtrusive survey
items may provide inaccurate estimates of aggregate levels
of vote buying and bias analyses of the targeting strate-
gies of political parties due to systematic patterns in so-
cial desirability bias. While such bias has not gone com-
pletely unacknowledged by scholars (Brusco, Nazareno,
and Stokes 2004, 69-72; Stokes 2005, 321, fn. 20), exist-
ing alternatives, such as those asking about vote buying
occurring in respondents’ neighborhoods, do not suffi-
ciently eliminate social desirability concerns, nor do they
allow particularly precise understandings of whom par-
ties and candidates target for vote buying. Asa result, the
implications of significant measurement error for em-
pirical analyses have largely been ignored. Without more
valid and reliable measures of vote buying, advancing the
clientelism research agenda will be difficult.

To assess the validity of these arguments, we em-
ployed a measurement technique to determine the degree
to which social desirability bias affects direct vote-buying
items and how such bias is distributed across relevant
variables. We surveyed registered voters in Nicaragua im-
mediately after the 2008 municipal elections and found
that nearly a quarter of respondents received a gift or
favor in exchange for their vote according to an unob-
trusive “list experiment.” In contrast, less than 3% of
respondents reported that they had received a gift or fa-
vor when asked directly. Not only does the direct measure
vastly underestimate vote buying, but the social desirabil-
ity bias is also nonrandom and correlated with politically
important variables. This finding implies that analyses
employing direct measures are likely to yield inaccurate
results. We also find that political campaigns target in-
dividuals who think parties can monitor their vote, thus
overcoming the commitment problems inherent to these
transactions.

Response Bias and Vote Buying

When respondents fear expressing socially undesirable
attitudes or admitting to participating in stigmatized

“OI Aoppuoo Kayum Krerquauyuoyssdny woss papeo[wmog | °Z OZ “LO6SOPS1

  

8
8
3
8
3
z
3
z
g
8
g
z
x
$
g
g
Pe
o
g
z
5.
z
=
2
@
G
g
s
3
s
8
8
&
2
&
=
z
z
a
zB
°
s
2:
g
2
3
g

 

asu20r] suOUIUIOD aageasD aiqeouidde aqp Kq pausanc8 a1e sajouue WO ‘asm Jo sama 4oy Kaesqe7] BULU KafiAA Wo (suONmUOD-puE-suMDIAUIOD’Ka[uM hae
204

or illegal behavior, social desirability bias can occur
(Bradburn et al. 1978; DeMaio 1984; Johnson and Van de
Vijver 2003). Some respondents misrepresent themselves
to show favorable images of themselves to interviewers on
subjects such as racial attitudes (Berinsky 1999; Kuklinski,
Cobb, and Gilens 1997; Kuklinski et al. 1997), religious
attitudes and behaviors (Kane, Craig, and Wald 2004;
Presser and Stinson 1998), sexual behavior (Tourangeau
and Smith 1996), drug use (Bachman and O’Malley 1981;
Tourangeau and Smith 1996), and voter turnout (Silver,
Anderson, and Abramson 1986).

Survey respondents may view standard vote-buying
items as sensitive due to the practice’s illegality, its con-
tradiction of democratic norms, and its association with
negative stigmas attached to poverty (Stokes 2005, 321,
fn. 20). Thus, asking directly about receiving a gift in ex-
change for a vote may result in social desirability bias and
the underreporting of its incidence. This makes it par-
ticularly difficult to reliably estimate the proportion of
people receiving goods, much less determine what type
of people parties target for vote buying.*

Although scholars sometimes recognize the bias in-
herent in their direct measure of vote buying, they too
easily dismiss the problem in the testing of their mod-
els. Following King, Keohane, and Verba (1994, 157-68),
some have argued that when vote buying is the dependent
variable, measurement error is of less concern, since mea-
surement error in the dependent variable generally only
decreases the efficiency of the estimate (i-e., the standard
errors increase and the statistical significance of coeffi-
cients decrease), while it is unlikely to bias the coefficients.
Thus, they argue, measurement error places a greater bur-
den on the researcher by making it more difficult to find
significant associations (e.g., Stokes 2005, 321, fn. 20).

This reasoning, however, is not entirely convincing
since it is based on the assumption that error in direct
measures of vote buying is nonsystematic (i-e., random)
and constant across all relevant subgroups. Measure-
ment error that systematically varies across subgroups
would bias inferences (King, Keohane, and Verba 1994,
155-57). For example, adjudicating between game the-

3 While not all survey items exhibit response bias, questions that
appear either threatening—due, for instance, to the illegality of the
behavior—or sensitive—as a result of negative social stigmas—are
most likely to cause significant misreporting and thereby increase
measurement error.

4 Brusco, Nazareno, and Stokes (2004, 69-72) note that as a result of
these considerations, it is nearly impossible to provide an accurate
point estimate of vote buying and suggest that the best estimate lies
somewhere in between the estimates provided by individual and
neighborhood vote-buying items.

EZEQUIEL GONZALEZ-OCANTOS ET AL.

oretic models often hinges on the decision of parties
to target either weakly opposed voters for vote buying
(e.g., Stokes 2005) or strong supporters for turnout buy-
ing (e.g., Nichter 2008). Assume that contrary to both
of these models, parties distribute gifts to both groups
at equal levels or that they distribute goods randomly.
If strong supporters see gift dispensation by their party
as a commendable component of clientelistic “problem
solving networks” (Auyero 2001), they may underreport
vote buying to a lesser extent than weak supporters. Sim-
ilarly, compared to strong supporters, swing voters may
be relatively reluctant to admit being offered gifts because
they are consciously “selling” their vote. In either case,
systematic social desirability bias would cause traditional
analysis to wrongly suggest weakly opposed citizens are
less likely to receive gifts or favors than strong supporters.
Thus, findings from direct questions that core supporters
are more likely to be targeted are not on firm empirical
ground.

The primary alternative to the direct individual item
is asking about vote buying more indirectly by inquir-
ing about vote buying in the respondent’s neighborhood,
but this tactic also introduces potentially nonrandom
measurement error.° Unfortunately, respondents may re-
main hesitant to answer this item truthfully due to social
desirability concerns. It is also unclear that indicating
vote buying in one’s neighborhood is a good proxy for
individual-level vote buying. Response bias can result if
supporters of a given party report vote-buying opera-
tions by rival organizations in their neighborhood to dis-
credit them. Additionally, questions regarding campaign
vote buying in neighborhoods have the obvious prob-
lem of not directly or reliably capturing who is being
targeted. Such items may simply capture the public na-
ture of vote buying and not its frequency. For example,
neighborhood measures may overestimate vote buying in
urban areas and underestimate the frequency in rural ar-
eas where the probability of a clientelistic exchange being
observed by other citizens is lower. Thus, it is entirely
plausible that measurement error in neighborhood esti-
mates of vote-buying behavior is correlated with politi-
cally relevant variables and can lead to biased inferences as
well.

5 Asking whether the respondent has turned or would turn to a
party operative for help has also been used as an alternate dependent
variable. While this might improve inferences, such items are less
direct measures of vote buying and assume that the same people
who turn to parties for help also are given gifts in return for votes
and people who do not seek assistance are not provided gifts. This
empirically verifiable assumption is hard to test given the high
likelihood of bias in the measurement of each variable.

“OI Aoppuoo Kayum Krerquauyuoyssdny woss papeo[wmog | °Z OZ “LO6SOPS1

  

8
8
3
8
3
z
3
z
g
8
g
z
x
$
g
g
Pe
o
g
z
5.
z
=
2
@
G
g
s
3
s
8
8
&
2
&
=
z
z
a
zB
°
s
2:
g
2
3
g

 

asu20r] suOUIUIOD aageasD aiqeouidde aqp Kq pausanc8 a1e sajouue WO ‘asm Jo sama 4oy Kaesqe7] BULU KafiAA Wo (suONmUOD-puE-suMDIAUIOD’Ka[uM hae
VOTE BUYING AND SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

The List Experiment

In order to reduce social desirability bias in the measure of
vote buying, we employed an unobtrusive measurement
technique known as the list experiment (or unmatched
item count technique). While this is the first attempt to use
a list experiment to gauge levels of vote buying, political
scientists have successfully used list experiments to study
a number of other topics subject to social desirability
bias, including racism (Kuklinski, Cobb, and Gilens 1997;
Kuklinski et al. 1997) and self-reported voter turnout
(Holbrook and Krosnick 2010).°

The logic of the list experiment is straightforward.
First, the survey sample is split into random halves: a treat-
ment and a control group. Each group is read the same
question and shown a card with the response options,
which differs only in the number of response categories:

I'm going to hand you a card that mentions var-
ious activities, and I would like for you to tell me
if they were carried out by candidates or activists
during the last electoral campaign. Please, do not
tell me which ones, only HOW MANY.

For the control group, the following campaign activities
are listed and read to respondents:

e they put up campaign posters or signs in your
neighborhood/city;

e they visited your home;

e they placed campaign advertisements on television
or radio;

e they threatened you to vote for them.

The treatment group is shown and read a fifth category,
placed in the third response position:

e they gave you a gift or did you a favor’

The question does not ask respondents to reveal to
the interviewer the specific activities parties or activists

® For a discussion of the validity of the technique and associated
strengths and weaknesses, see Appendix C in the online supporting
information. We complement this with the results of a validation
experiment conducted in Uruguay and Honduras.

7 We included the final category (threatening the respondent) in
order to reduce the chance of a ceiling effect (see Kuklinski et al.
1997). Even with this item, though, 26 respondents indicated all
five items, suggesting that some ceiling effect may have occurred.
However, such an effect would only serve to depress estimates,
thereby working against our social desirability bias hypothesis. The
English and Spanish versions of the instrument can be found in
Appendix B in the online supporting information.

205

practiced. The respondents only have to tell the inter-
viewer how many activities were carried out, so the ques-
tion provides the respondent a high degree of anonymity
since the interviewer cannot ascertain which activities
the respondent indicates. Because respondents intuitively
understand this anonymity, social desirability pressures
should be reduced, providing less incentive to underre-
port vote buying.

Since respondents were randomly assigned to the
treatment and control groups, the two groups will be
identical on both observable and unobservable charac-
teristics, in expectation. Thus, an estimate of the propor-
tion of respondents receiving a gift or favor can be de-
rived simply by comparing the average number of items
indicated by the respondents in each group to the list-
experiment question. If no vote buying occurred, there
would be no difference in the mean number of items re-
ported by each group on average. Systematic differences
in the means provide a point estimate on the number of
people reporting vote-buying activity. For example, if the
average number of items indicated by the control group
is 2.10 and the average number of items indicated by
the treatment group is 2.35, then we can conclude that
25% of respondents received a gift or favor (2.35 — 2.10
= 0.25, and 0.25*100 = 25%). The list experiment can
also estimate means within different subgroups of the
overall sample (e.g., partisan, socioeconomic, gender).
Estimates of social desirability bias across subgroups can
be determined by the absolute difference between the list
experiment estimates and the estimates derived by both
direct individual and neighborhood items.

The Nicaraguan Case

The central aim of this article is to show that the method-
ology usually employed to measure the pervasiveness of
vote buying and its political dynamics is potentially bi-
ased. We use the list experiment to demonstrate this em-
pirically with survey evidence from Nicaragua following
the country’s November 2008 municipal elections.

Over the past two decades, two main political factions
have become dominant in Nicaragua’s political system, al-
ternating in power on several occasions. The former guer-
rilla movement and current leftist party, Frente Sandinista
de Liberacién Nacional (FSLN),® controls the presidency

’ The party is headed by Daniel Ortega, who was a member of
the Junta Nacional de Reconstruccién that took office when dictator
Somoza was overthrown in July 1979. When the FSLN came to
dominate the junta, Ortega became the de facto ruler of Nicaragua.
In 1984, through competitive elections, Ortega became president
for the period 1985-1990, and more recently, in 2006, he was re-
elected.

Hol Aoppuico korn Kseaqurauyuoyrsdny woss papeovumog ‘|Z 10Z ‘LO6SOPSI

 

asuaor] suOWIUIOD aguas a[quouidde ayy Kq pausono8 axe sajouuE WO fasn Jo Sama 40} Kaeaqe] aUL[U aft Wo (suONIPUCD-puE-suUDIAUOD’Ka[UMaesqu{aut[uoyesdiy) SHORE puE SHAY, 2H 29 TZZOZ/I H/C] YO Kacsqey] aUYUO KLM ‘WeUETEN RAwIOg 7 s9UMOA BIEL IO Aussoawan £q XOHSOO' | 1OZLO6S-OFS ITY
206

and maintains a firm support base around 40%, with
electoral strongholds in poor urban areas. Since the late
1990s, the Partido Liberal Constitucionalista (PLC) has
positioned itself as the primary center-right opposition
to the Sandinistas by attracting support from the middle
classes, small businesses, and poor voters in rural areas
(Guzman and Pinto 2008).? The rightist parties when
considered together have generally held more than half of
the vote share (around 55%), but in the 2006 presidential
elections votes were spread across several parties. !°

The 2008 municipal elections were not heavily con-
tested in all parts of the country, but high levels of com-
petition in some of the largest and most important mu-
nicipalities in the country, including the capital Managua
and Le6n, led the major parties to use every tool at their
disposal to secure victory (Marti ] Puig 2008).!' Although
media sources were attentive to vote buying during the
campaign and reported that “food stamps, rice, beans .. .
and 25 thousand stoves were distributed,”'” how widely
vote buying was practiced is unclear.

A strong history of patrimonialism and clientelism
more generally suggests that vote buying should be preva-
lent in Nicaragua. Dye and Close (2004) argue that un-
der Somoza’s dictatorial regime (1939-79), Nicaraguans
experienced the establishment of a patrimonial state in
which the distinction between public and partisan realms
was blurred.!* This long-standing tradition of using state

° PLC leaders governed Nicaragua for two consecutive periods:
Arnoldo Aleman between 1997 and 2002, and Enrique Bolafios
between 2002 and 2007.

'0 Since the 2006 presidential election, and with the return of
Montealegre to the PLC, the other rightist party, Alianza Liberal
Nicaragiiense (ALN), has lost its political appeal. In the 2008 mu-
nicipal elections, ALN obtained only 2.1% of the valid votes.

"| According to the electoral council’s provisional results, the San-
dinistas won 94 ofthe 146 municipalities, including Managua. With
70% of the votes counted in Managua, the Consejo Supremo Elec-
toral (CSE) claimed that FSLN candidate Alexis Arguello received
51.3% of the valid votes and defeated PLC’s Eduardo Montealegre,
who garnered 46.5%. These results were challenged by the oppo-
sition and international observers. During several days after the
election, the Nicaraguan capital was the scene of riots and con-
frontations between the Liberals, who were claiming fraud, and
the Sandinistas, who were “defending the people’s choice.” Despite
pressures from the international community, the opposition’s claim
did not advance and the electoral council proclaimed the FSLN as
the winner of the elections. In January 2009, several civil society
organizations presented 100,000 signatures to the CSE demanding
a recount of votes. As of December 2010, the state has still not re-
leased official election results. Currently, the official website makes
no mention of the election. See http://www.cse.gob.ni.

 Envio, October 2008, report No. 309.

5 See Millet (1977) for a history of the partisan use of public
monies, especially during Somoza’s regime. See Vargas (2004) for
more recent accounts of this phenomenon.

EZEQUIEL GONZALEZ-OCANTOS ET AL.

resources to oil political machines enables the capture of
state bureaucracies to reward political allies and to funnel
resources to the government's electoral base in contem-
porary Nicaraguan politics (Marenco 2004).!4

Given the wide-ranging forms of corruption in
Nicaragua, one might wonder why parties need to en-
gage in vote buying at all. Not only were the 2008 mu-
nicipal elections in Nicaragua tainted by accusations of
electoral fraud, but the Supreme Electoral Council also
made a series of rulings before the election that system-
atically benefited the FSLN (Greene 2010). Furthermore,
voters can be wooed with the promise of patronage jobs
and the provision of club goods, neither of which falls
under our strict definition of vote buying. With so many
tools at a regime’s disposal, vote buying may be “un-
necessary.” However, there are three reasons that parties
may still decide to engage in vote buying. First, vote buy-
ing is probably less costly than electoral fraud, so parties
may buy votes in order to obviate the need to engage
in postballot forms of electoral corruption. Second, vote
buying could be a logical extension of goods and services
provided in nonelectoral time periods. The vote buying
immediately prior to the election might even be a neces-
sary reminder of the ongoing largess provided to the voter
by the party. Finally, elections are competitive and parties
seize every opportunity to secure votes. Just as campaigns
hang posters, air radio ads, and stage rallies regardless of
their effectiveness, campaigns may engage in vote buying
to gain an edge on (or keep up with) the competition.
Thus, the documented presence of alternative forms of
electoral corruption does not rule out the utilization of
vote buying as a campaign strategy.

While research on the actual incidence of vote
buying—rather than broader clientelism—in Nicaragua
is limited, extant literature suggests that vote buying is
an important component of electoral competition in
the country. Nicaraguan parties across the ideological
spectrum engage in clientelistic practices both in and
out of power (Guzman and Pinto 2008). Even though
vote buying is considered an electoral crime according
to Nicaraguan Electoral Law,’ enforcement is nonexis-
tent and vote buying has become a common mobilization

“ Vote buying is only but one option in the large “menu of ma-
nipulation” used by incumbents seeking to secure electoral victory
(Schedler 2002). Indeed, the Liberal opposition claimed outright
fraud in vote counts in Managua (see fn. 13).

'S Article 174 allows campaign activity but is unequivocal with re-
spect to the distribution of goods in exchange for votes: “anyone
who bribes someone else in order to support any specific candidacy,
vote for a specific option, or abstain from voting will be sanctioned
with six to twelve months in prison” (Law 331, Electoral Law [Jan-
uary 19, 2000], Title XIV, Unique Chapter on Electoral Crimes,
Article 174; translation is ours).

Hol Aoppuico korn Kseaqurauyuoyrsdny woss papeovumog ‘|Z 10Z ‘LO6SOPSI

 

asuaor] suOWIUIOD aguas a[quouidde ayy Kq pausono8 axe sajouuE WO fasn Jo Sama 40} Kaeaqe] aUL[U aft Wo (suONIPUCD-puE-suUDIAUOD’Ka[UMaesqu{aut[uoyesdiy) SHORE puE SHAY, 2H 29 TZZOZ/I H/C] YO Kacsqey] aUYUO KLM ‘WeUETEN RAwIOg 7 s9UMOA BIEL IO Aussoawan £q XOHSOO' | 1OZLO6S-OFS ITY
VOTE BUYING AND SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

strategy. Parties on the left and right have resources to de-
velop and maintain clientelistic networks. In the context
of the 2008 elections, both sides could engage in vote buy-
ing since the FSLN had access to government resources
and the PLC possessed strong ties to business interests
and still controlled some subnational offices. In addition,
being the second poorest country in Latin America, both
leftist and rightist parties in Nicaragua have low-income
core constituencies that allow them to engage success-
fully and efficiently in vote-buying strategies alongside or
in detriment of programmatic ones because of the high
relative value that inexpensive gifts have for these voters.!
In this respect, Nicaraguan politics is different from po-
litical practices in countries where vote buying is usually
studied (e.g., Argentina) because two, rather than one,
well-articulated machines extensively practice vote buy-
ing. This depiction of Nicaraguan politics anticipates high
levels of vote buying but hints that vote buying might be
accepted as “politics as usual” by respondents, who would
therefore be less concerned with social desirability.

An alternative view of Nicaraguan political culture
examines the lasting effect of the Sandinista revolution
on political attitudes and behaviors and argues that the
movement that overthrew Somoza created a context unfa-
vorable to clientelistic relationships (Anderson and Dodd
2005, 2009). According to this literature, the Sandinista-
led social revolution helped to foster a highly participatory
society hostile to vertical ties between party leaders and
citizens. In contrast to its nonrevolutionary neighbors,
Nicaraguans and their political institutions have demon-
strated less authoritarianism and have tended to be more
politically engaged and tied to political parties (Booth
and Richard 2006). However, these same authors have
argued that this distinctiveness has decayed over time,
as the differences between Nicaragua and its neighbors
in electoral behavior have largely diminished (Booth and
Richard 2006), but this trend may not hold at the local
level (Anderson and Dodd 2009). Given this grassroots
nature of the Nicaraguan political culture, these authors
would anticipate a strong social stigma against the prac-
tice of vote buying, suggesting that even if the practice has
become a part of everyday politics, the cultural legacy of
the revolution may still induce significant socially desir-
able responding in the context of a survey.

To gauge the extent to which vote buying is stig-
matized in Nicaraguan political culture, we added two
survey questions to an omnibus, face-to-face survey of

‘6 Fora similar argument based on the Argentine case, see Calvo and
Murillo (2004). According to the World Bank (2005), the regional
average of per capita GDP in Latin America and the Caribbean
during the period 1990-2006 was $3,489 (constant US dollars),
but only $451 in Nicaragua.

207

TABLE 1 Likelihood of Social Desirability Bias

 

 

in Nicaragua
Likelihood of Admitting Acceptability of
to Receiving Gift Hypothetical Vote-
ona Survey Buying Exchange
Very Likely 5.7% Totally 1.8%
Acceptable
Somewhat Likely 14.2% Acceptable 6.3%
Not Very Likely 20.1% Understandable 11.7%
but not
Acceptable
Not at All Likely 51.3% Unacceptable 40.3%
‘Totally 36.5%
Unacceptable
Don’t Know / No 8.7% Don’t Know / No 3.5%
Answer Answer
N 1008 1008

 

Nicaraguan adults conducted in September 2010 (nearly
two years after the election we studied).'” The first ques-
tion directly asked about the likelihood that survey re-
spondents would admit to receiving a gift. The second
question sought to measure the stigma associated with
vote buying by asking about the acceptability of a hypo-
thetical patron-client exchange.'®

The results (Table 1) provide strong evidence against
the hypothesis that social desirability bias should be min-
imal due to the everyday nature of practice. Over 70% of
respondents reported that they thought it was not very
or not at all likely that a person would admit to having
taken part in a vote-buying exchange, while fewer than
20% thought it would be very or somewhat likely that
a person would admit to selling his or her vote on a
survey. Results are similar when respondents were asked
to evaluate the acceptability of a hypothetical patron-
client exchange. Over 75% of respondents thought that
the hypothetical exchange was unacceptable or totally un-
acceptable, while only 8% thought that the situation was
acceptable or totally acceptable. These two items demon-
strate a strong normative stigma against vote buying in
the context of surveys conducted in Nicaragua. This find-
ing suggests that social desirability bias can be strong even

'” For a full description of the survey design, see Appendix B in the
online supporting information.

'8 Spanish and English versions of the survey items can be found in
the online supporting information.

“OI Aoppuoo Kayum Krerquauyuoyssdny woss papeo[wmog | °Z OZ “LO6SOPS1

  

8
8
3
8
3
z
3
z
g
8
g
z
x
$
g
g
Pe
o
g
z
5.
z
=
2
@
G
g
s
3
s
8
8
&
2
&
=
z
z
a
zB
°
s
2:
g
2
3
g

 

asu20r] suOUIUIOD aageasD aiqeouidde aqp Kq pausanc8 a1e sajouue WO ‘asm Jo sama 4oy Kaesqe7] BULU KafiAA Wo (suONmUOD-puE-suMDIAUIOD’Ka[uM hae
208

in a country in which clientelism is a deeply embedded
practice.?

In order to pilot test our survey questions, get a
feel for campaign dynamics, and generate hypotheses to
test with the data generated during the 2008 municipal
election, one of the authors conducted fieldwork that
documented the existence of well-articulated political
brokerage networks managing highly detailed personal
information about the needs of their potential clients
on behalf of candidates. These networks of local brokers
allow political parties to tailor the goods and services
provided to the needs of particular voters and distribute
them in exchange for their votes. For example, Alexis
Arguello, the Sandinista candidate for mayor of Man-
agua, on October 22, 2008, visited the Asentamiento Hugo
Chavez Frias, one of the many shantytowns surround-
ing Managua, and delivered precisely nine wheelchairs
to the nine handicapped people in the neighborhood.”°
According to Nicaraguan political analysts interviewed
during fieldwork, the conservative parties’ networks op-
erate in a similar fashion. The PLC has built deeply rooted
clientelistic networks in the rural areas of the country, de-
livering goods such as chickens or cows in order to mobi-
lize voters.”! These kinds of goods are clearly considered
part ofa political transaction. According to a Nicaraguan
social researcher, “construction materials, cattle, money,
and medicine are traditionally the most frequent goods
delivered in electoral campaigns in exchange for votes.”

More recently, the Sandinistas have taken advantage
of government-sponsored (and Sandinista-controlled)
Consejos de Poder Ciudadano (Citizen Power Councils,
CPCs) for clientelistic purposes.” Distribution of goods
through the CPC is not part of an official welfare pro-
gram or part of policy-targeting techniques, since they
are manipulated under a clientelistic logic (Marti I Puig

'? During the 2008 electoral campaign the Catholic Church’s edu-
cation campaign against vote buying may have enhanced the stigma
attached to the practice (La Prensa, October 31, 2008).

0 Field notes (October 2008).
21 Interview (October 2008).

2 Tn contrast, the possibility of getting a job is perceived “as a nor-
mal reward for their collaboration during campaigns.” Interview
(October 2008).

°3 The Nicaraguan Constitution (1985) and the Municipal Law
(Law 40, reformed in 1997) established several mechanisms that
encourage citizen participation in public affairs (Avendafio 2006).
Since his comeback to office in 2006, President Ortega introduced
“participatory democracy” reforms by creating the Consejos de
Poder Ciudadano, which are state-sponsored deliberative neigh-
borhood organizations.

EZEQUIEL GONZALEZ-OCANTOS ET AL.

2009).”4 Furthermore, such brokerage networks play a key
role not only in distributing goods and favors but also in
monitoring the behavior of clients. According to a multi-
lateral agency official, citizens believe that their votes can
be monitored by the FSLN and by the Nicaraguan Intel-
ligence Agency, Direccién General de Inteligencia Civil. It
is in the interest of political parties to foster this miscon-
ception because it makes noncompliance by gift recipients
less likely.”°

Survey Description

We conducted a nationally representative face-to-face sur-
vey between November 25 and December 8, 2008, two
weeks after the municipal elections.*° The survey was a
multistage random sample with the electoral registry serv-
ing as the sampling frame with voting centers (precincts)
randomly chosen proportionate to department and mu-
nicipality size. There were 84 final sampling points (seg-
ments), including 12 respondents per segment who were
randomly assigned to treatment and control surveys.””
The American Association of Public Opinion Research
(AAPOR) response rate 3 for the survey was 77% and
resulted in 1,008 respondents.

In addition to the list experiment described previ-
ously, the survey instrument also included a number of
other items used in the empirical analysis. To compare
and contrast the different techniques for detecting vote
buying, respondents were asked whether they had seen
vote buying in their neighborhood and whether they had

4 According to Envio (October 2008, Report 309), the CPCs
have “two faces.” First, these organizations recruit and mobilize
people who need food stamps or low-interest loans (two key so-
cial programs are Hambre Cero [Zero Hunger] and Usura Cero
[Zero Profiteering]). Any member of a CPC has access to house-
building programs, legal property titles, and employment pro-
grams. Second, the government gives power and resources to CPC’s
leaders in order to monitor the political loyalty of members of the
community.

5 Tn interviews with various citizens in a poor neighborhood in
Managua (October 2008), the Sandinista practice of “helping” poor
citizens in obtaining electoral identification documents “practically
for free” is perceived by these citizens to be a mechanism to monitor
their vote, even though they cannot identify with precision how it
operates.

26 Elections were not held in the seven municipalities in the au-
tonomous North Atlantic Region, which was still recovering from
the 2007 Hurricane Felix and postponed elections until January
2009. Thus, the two autonomous regions on the Atlantic coast
(representing 10% of the Nicaraguan population) were excluded
from the sample.

”’ For a full description of the survey design as well as for Spanish
and English versions of the questionnaire, go to the online sup-
porting information. Randomization occurred at the individual
level.

Hol Aoppuico korn Kseaqurauyuoyrsdny woss papeovumog ‘|Z 10Z ‘LO6SOPSI

 

asuaor] suOWIUIOD aguas a[quouidde ayy Kq pausono8 axe sajouuE WO fasn Jo Sama 40} Kaeaqe] aUL[U aft Wo (suONIPUCD-puE-suUDIAUOD’Ka[UMaesqu{aut[uoyesdiy) SHORE puE SHAY, 2H 29 TZZOZ/I H/C] YO Kacsqey] aUYUO KLM ‘WeUETEN RAwIOg 7 s9UMOA BIEL IO Aussoawan £q XOHSOO' | 1OZLO6S-OFS ITY
VOTE BUYING AND SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

been targeted themselves using wording nearly identical

to the treatment item on the list experiment in order to

allow for a direct comparison of the different items.”

Follow-up questions asked those who responded affir-
matively to either of the direct questions about which
parties engaged in the distribution of gifts, the kinds of
material incentives dispensed, and whether the gifts had
an influence on their vote.

To test existing predictions about party targeting, we
collected information about the respondent’s socioeco-
nomic status (i.e., income, education, gender, age, and
area of residency; e.g., Calvo and Murillo 2004; Kitschelt
and Wilkinson 2007),”? partisanship (e.g., Cox and Mc-
Cubbins 1986; Dixit and Londregan 1996; Nichter 2008;
Stokes 2005), beliefs about party monitoring of vote
choice (e.g., Stokes 2005), and proximity to institutions
that may facilitate the distribution of goods or alter per-
ceptions of monitoring capacities.

These last two sets of items require some additional
elaboration, as they have generally not been subject to
empirical testing, even though they are important in
theoretical models. Vote buying is characterized by a

?8 Readers may wonder whether the wording “gifts or favors” ad-
equately captures the type of exchanges that interest vote buying
researchers. Follow-up questions to the direct neighborhood and
individual questions in our Nicaragua survey mitigate this con-
cern. When asked about the specific gifts or favors given away in
their neighborhood, respondents indicate that furniture, animals,
food, tools, and construction material constitute 77% of the items
delivered, 6% reported parties handing out money, and a miscella-
neous group of gifts represents another 5%. Only 12% of the gifts
reported could be associated with common campaign giveaways,
such as clothing (hats and T-shirts) and souvenirs (banners and
backpacks). The proportions remain similar when respondents are
asked if they personally received gifts or favors. These data indicate
that (a) parties deliver a broad variety of goods targeting particular
needs and (b) our question wording has high measurement validity.
Furthermore, if social desirability bias is deflating estimates from
the direct measures, it is unlikely that those providing misleading
answers do so to cover up the receipt of relatively benign campaign
giveaways. Thus, the list experiment should help to eliminate the
reporting of gifts not usually associated with vote buying.

» Income is measured using dummy variables so that respondents
for whom we have missing income data (7% of the sample) are not
excluded from the analysis and to avoid imposing linearity. “Very
poor” indicates that the respondent makes less than $100 USD per
month (approximately less than C$3,000 Cordoba Oros). “Poor”
signifies that the respondent’s income is between $100 and $200
USD per month (between C$3,001 and C$4,250). “Middle/upper”
indicates that the respondent makes more than $200 USD (more
than C$4,251) per month. Education is operationalized as a four-
point ordinal variable, ranging from 0 (less than primary education
completed) to 3 (postsecondary education). Gender is a dichoto-
mous variable taking the value of 1 if the respondent is a female.
Age is coded as a three-value ordinal variable for people between 18
and 29 years old, between 30 and 49, and older than 50. Residency
is coded as a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the respondent
lives in an urban area and 0 if the respondent lives in a rural area.

209

commitment problem requiring the development of a
deeply penetrating political machine to monitor com-
pliance (Kitschelt 2000; Stokes 2005). That said, there is
some disagreement on the importance of monitoring in
the politics of vote buying. Nichter (2008) argues that
given the existence of the secret ballot and the ensuing
impossibility of reliable monitoring, parties target their
own supporters in an effort to get out the vote, as op-
posed to buying off indifferent or opposition voters. Some
scholars go as far as to suggest that it is this inability to
solve the commitment problem that makes vote buying
a very ineffective form of electioneering and therefore a
rare phenomenon (e.g., Lehoucg 2007). Only by com-
bining a reliable measurement of the aggregate levels of
vote buying with an appropriate operationalization of
monitoring can these rival explanations be adjudicated.
Although the ethnographic literature has described the
workings of effective monitoring machines (e.g., Auyero
2001) and formal models have incorporated monitor-
ing as an important parameter (e.g., Stokes 2005), the
survey-based quantitative literature has not consistently
measured monitoring.

The item on party monitoring asked whether respon-
dents believed that the government or parties could find
out how people in their community voted. Whether re-
spondents had received social welfare benefits was asked,
with the intuition that being in the government’s records
increases the probability of both harassment and mon-
itoring.*° We also asked whether their neighborhood
had received investments in public works in the last six
months, with the expectation that those areas where the
state’s presence is higher or where the incumbent party
invests more resources may be more susceptible to clien-
telistic practices. Finally, we inquired about the frequency
of involvement in CPCs. Participation in these local de-
liberative bodies could raise the visibility of participants
in the eyes of the clientelistic machine and increase the
latter’s ability to monitor the voting behavior of these
individuals, making them likely targets of vote buying.

Results from the List Experiment

The first step in the analysis is to estimate the number
of people reporting the receipt of a gift or favor through
the list experiment.*! The first column of Table 2 reports

3° Depending on how welfare policies are distributed, they can also
be used as a form of vote buying by parties. In our pilot testing
and responses to the survey, no respondents mentioned welfare
programs under the term “vote buying.”

3! The balance between treatment and control groups across rel-
evant demographic variables suggests that the randomization

Hol Aoppuico korn Kseaqurauyuoyrsdny woss papeovumog ‘|Z 10Z ‘LO6SOPSI

 

asuaor] suOWIUIOD aguas a[quouidde ayy Kq pausono8 axe sajouuE WO fasn Jo Sama 40} Kaeaqe] aUL[U aft Wo (suONIPUCD-puE-suUDIAUOD’Ka[UMaesqu{aut[uoyesdiy) SHORE puE SHAY, 2H 29 TZZOZ/I H/C] YO Kacsqey] aUYUO KLM ‘WeUETEN RAwIOg 7 s9UMOA BIEL IO Aussoawan £q XOHSOO' | 1OZLO6S-OFS ITY
210

EZEQUIEL GONZALEZ-OCANTOS ET AL.

TABLE 2 Vote Buying, Direct and Unobtrusive Measures

 

Direct Items

 

 

List Experiment Individual Gifts Neighborhood Gifts
Control 2.06 [495]
Treatment 2.31[500]

Estimated % receiving gifts 24.34% (5.53)
N 995

2.39%*** (0.58) 17.84% (1.80)
1003 998

 

Notes: List-experiment control and treatment values are the mean number of items identified by respondents. The numbers of subjects in
each condition are in brackets. Linearized standard errors adjusted for the survey design are in parentheses.

atakok

p < .01 for difference between list-experiment proportion and the direct individual proportion. The difference between the list and

neighborhood proportions is not statistically significant. Tests are two-tailed difference of proportions tests.

the results of the list experiment. The mean number of
electoral activities reported by respondents in the control
group with only four options is 2.06, while the mean in
the treatment group where subjects had the added choice
of “receiving a gift or favor” is 2.31. Random assign-
ment ensures that the difference is due to respondents
reporting vote buying. Thus, the estimated percentage of
respondents receiving gifts during the election accord-
ing to the list experiment is 24% (s.e. = 5.5 percentage
points).°?

This number is not only statistically significant, but
also very different than when asking respondents about
vote buying directly. Only 2.4% of respondents (s.e. =
0.6 percentage points) admitted receiving a gift or fa-
vor personally (Table 2, column 2). The nearly 20-point
difference is a different order of magnitude altogether
(unsurprisingly, the difference between the two estimates
is highly significant). The list experiment depicts vote
buying to be pervasive, while the direct survey measure
used in most quantitative studies suggests the practice is
rare.*> The aggregate results are somewhat better when
relying on the neighborhood vote-buying item, which in-
dicates that 17.7% of respondents (s.e. = 1.8 percent-
age points) answered in the affirmative. The 6.7 per-
centage point difference between the list experiment and
the neighborhood question is not statistically significant
(p = 0.263).

procedure worked properly. See Appendix A in the online sup-
porting information.

*» For the entire analysis, standard errors are adjusted for the survey
design.

*? Even though the list experiment preceded the direct questions,
there is little evidence to support the hypothesis that the question
order in the survey instrument affected responses. Those respon-
dents assigned to the treatment list were no more or less likely
to report individual vote buying and only marginally more likely
to indicate neighborhood vote buying (neither difference reaches
conventional levels of statistical significance).

Examining the list experiment by important sub-
groups makes it possible to construct a map of which
types of people parties target for vote buying. The pre-
cision of the list experiment depends on the number of
subjects in a particular cell (see Table 3, column 3 for
the proportion of the overall sample in each category),
so the uncertainty surrounding each subgroup is large,
but it is striking how few differences there are across
subgroups on key variables (see Table 3, column 4). Inde-
pendents and members of both parties all received gifts
(none of the estimates are significantly different from
each other), offering little support for Nichter’s (2008)
argument that machines mainly target core supporters
in an effort to buy turnout. The patterns observed could
be evidence that both parties attempt to buy off oppo-
sition and independent voters, thus supporting Stokes’s
(2005) theory. Alternatively, since our fieldwork obser-
vation in Nicaragua revealed that two clientelistic ma-
chines are competing against each other for votes, parties
might engage in gift dispensation to both safeguard their
core constituency and lure weakly opposed or indepen-
dent voters, giving rise to more widespread patterns of
distribution.

Contrary to expectations from the broader clien-
telism literature (e.g., Calvo and Murillo 2004; Kitschelt
and Wilkinson 2007), there was no evidence of a neg-
ative linear relationship between respondents’ socioeco-
nomic status and goods dispensation (e.g., welfare, in-
come, and education). This null finding suggests that
either Nicaragua is an exception or vote buying is prac-
ticed differently in municipal elections than in relatively
high-turnout national elections. Alternatively, it could be
suggested that the population is sufficiently poor that
gifts or favors would still remain appealing to those with
comparatively higher levels of income. The percent of re-
spondents reporting vote buying among the poorest (less
than $100 USD per month) and the marginally better off
($100 to $200 USD per month) is very similar. Although

“OI Aoppuoo Kayum Krerquauyuoyssdny woss papeo[wmog | °Z OZ “LO6SOPS1

  

8
8
3
8
3
z
3
z
g
8
g
z
x
$
g
g
Pe
o
g
z
5.
z
=
2
@
G
g
s
3
s
8
8
&
2
&
=
z
z
a
zB
°
s
2:
g
2
3
g

 

asu20r] suOUIUIOD aageasD aiqeouidde aqp Kq pausanc8 a1e sajouue WO ‘asm Jo sama 4oy Kaesqe7] BULU KafiAA Wo (suONmUOD-puE-suMDIAUIOD’Ka[uM hae
 

 

VOTE BUYING AND SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS 211
TABLE 3 Reports of Vote Buying in Important Subpopulations
Proportion of List-Experiment —_ Individual Neighborhood
Subgroup the Sample Estimate Estimate Estimate
Political Voted 63.4% 22.9% (8.9)** 2.7% (0.8) 20.0% (2.1)
Abstained 36.6% 27.5% (10.7)** 1.9% (0.8)17 14.0% (2.1)
Support FSLN 40.1% 20.9%(10.8)* 4.5% (1.2) 18.2% (2.7)
Support PLC 20.8% 32.6%(15.6)** 1.0% (0.7)77 24.8% (3.4)
Independents 37.6% 26.2%(10.2)** 1.1% (0.6)77 13.1% (2.1)
Welfare and Public Works Welfare 7.5% 10.0% (27.9) 18.9% (5.2) 27.0% (5.2)
No welfare 92.5% 24.7%(5.8)*** 1.1% (0.4)*T 17.1% (1.8)
Public works 40.8% 22.0% (9.4)** 4.2% (1.1) 24.4% (2.8)
No public works 59.2% 24.6%(8.3)*** 1.2% (0.6)*t 13.6% (1.8)
Citizen Power Councils Ever attended 18.3% 48.3% (16.5)"** 4.9% (1.8)tTT 19.8% (3.8)9
Never attended 81.7% 19.0%(7.0)*** 1.8% (0.6)77 17.4% (1.8)
Monitor Can monitor 35.7% 49.2%(11.4)*** 1.4% (0.6) ‘tt 19.8% (2.7)98
Cannot monitor 55.2% 6.3% (8.5) 2.9% (0.8) 16.0% (2.2)
Don’t know 9.1% 40.2%(21.1)* 3.3% (1.8)1 20.9% (4.4)
Income Very Poor 20.8% 23.1%(15.4) 4.3% (1.4) 16.3% (3.0)
Poor 46.0% 26.3%(10.2)** 2.4% (0.7)17 17.2% (2.5)
Middle/Upper 26.2% 14.2%(14.0) 1.5% (0.9) 22.2% (3.1)
Income No Answer 6.9% 52.1%(25.4)** 0.0% (0.0)17 10.0% (3.9)
Education No education 9.5% 16.1% (18.0) 3.1% (1.7) 15.1% (4.7)
Primary 34.0% 20.9%(10.8)* 3.5% (1.1) 15.8% (2.3)
Secondary 42.2% 26.7% (10.1)** 1.4% (0.6)17 20.0% (2.5)
University 14.3% 37.4%(19.3)* 2.1% (1.2)7 18.1% (4.2)
Age 18-29 36.1% 7.1%(10.1) 3.3% (1.2) 20.3% (3.3)
30-49 38.8% 29.7%(10.8)"** 1.5% (0.6)1T 17.2% (2.3)
50 or more 25.1% 41.3%(13.1)"** 2.4% (0.9)1T 15.3% (2.3)9
Gender Female 50.5% 33.2% (10.5)"** 2.2% (0.7) tT 15.5% (2.1)9
Male 49.5% 15.3%(9.0)* 2.6% (0.7) 20.2% (2.1)
Zone Rural 36.9% 25.5% (8.0)*** 3.0% (1.0) tT 18.9% (3.3)
Urban 63.1% 23.6% (7.5)*** 2.1% (0.7) tT 17.2% (2.1)

 

Notes: Linearized standard errors are in parentheses and are adjusted for the survey design.
* Denotes the statistical significance of the estimated difference between treatment and control groups according to the list experiment

(*p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01).

} Denotes the statistical significance of the difference between the estimated proportion of vote buying according to the list experiment
and the proportion of respondents directly reporting individual gifts (} p<0.1, tf p<0.05, t/t p <0.01).

§ Denotes the statistical significance of the difference between the estimated proportion of vote buying according to the list experiment
and the proportion of respondents directly reporting vote buying in their neighborhood (§ p<0.1, §§ p<0.05).

the point estimate for the wealthiest income group (more
than $200 USD per month) hints of some drop-off at
higher levels of income, the size of the standard errors for
the income subgroups suggests that there is no statistical
difference between the three groups.*4

** Changing the coding of the income categories (i.e., middle or
upper class) does not change this conclusion. Point estimates for
more restricted ranges of people at the top of the income distribu-
tion do not suggest that higher-income respondents are less likely
to receive gifts or favors from parties. A final interpretation for the
surprising result that vote buying is not more prevalent among the

Two differences between subgroups are statistically
significant and worthy of note. First, people who believe
ballots are secret are very unlikely to report vote buying
(6% with s.e. = 8.5 percentage points), while nearly half

poorest citizens is that the very poor are located in areas that are
difficult to reach. As a result, parties choose to target more geo-
graphically proximate voters in the urban working class sectors,
who in a country like Nicaragua are still sufficiently poor in abso-
lute terms so as to make their votes relatively cheap. However, we
do not find strong evidence that vote buying is less prevalent in
rural areas. We are indebted to Ana de la O for pointing out this
interpretation.

asu20r] suOWIUIO aguas aiquouidde aq Kq pausaRo8 axe sapouuE WO f9sn Jo sams 40} Keaqe] aUL{UG Ka[LA Uo (suOgIUOD-puE-suNDIAUOD’Ka[LMKresqu(aut[uoyesdiY) sHOUKDUDD pUE SUMAY, 2H 2G TZZOZI ICE] HO Kresge] UYU K2LLM “WEUETENY ATO 7% SUMO A BIEL IO AUUSHOALUT] £q XOHSOO' I 1OZ'LOGS-OPS ILI N01 AORPUOD Ka [Em Kaeaquauruoyrsduy wsosy PapeO[UMOK *] ‘Z10Z ‘LO6COPSI
212

of those respondents with doubts about the secrecy of the
ballot report vote buying (s.e. = 9.6 percentage points).
The second notable difference is that respondents who
ever attended CPC meetings were far more likely (48%) to
report vote buying than those who never attended (19%).
This difference confirms our observation that the CPCs
play an important role in the distribution of clientelistic
goods. CPC meetings could be used to transfer goods,
but the mechanism could also be persuading individuals
that the party can monitor ballots.*° These findings pro-
vide the first systematic piece of evidence in support of
scholars who hypothesize that parties either pinpoint peo-
ple who think monitoring is possible or convince targeted
individuals of the party’s ability to monitor the vote. Thus,
parties can solve the commitment dilemma inherent to
vote-buying exchanges during electoral processes that are
secret without the use of widespread coercive practices
(Auyero 2001; Levitsky 2003; Stokes 2005). In the pres-
ence of well-articulated clientelistic machines, theories
of vote-buying dynamics should not rule out the ability
of parties to monitor or credibly threaten noncompliant
voters (cf. Nichter 2008).

Analyzing the subgroups using the two obtrusive
measures (individual and neighborhood levels) highlights
the degree to which direct measures can understate the
incidence of vote buying. In nearly every category the
individual-level question estimates only a small fraction
of the clientelistic exchanges detected by the list experi-
ment (see Table 3, column 5).

The neighborhood measure fares a little better in
terms of the relative magnitudes of the proportions but
consistently produces estimates below those generated
by the list experiment (Table 3, column 6), suggest-
ing that Brusco, Nazareno, and Stokes’s (2004) rough
guess that the true level of vote buying may fall into
the range bounded by the individual and neighborhood
items may still understate levels of vote buying, at least
in the Nicaraguan context. One may be tempted to con-
clude that asking about vote buying in neighborhoods is
a viable alternative for overcoming social desirability bias
than the question focused on the individual. However,
not only are there validity questions associated with using
the neighborhood item as a proxy, but the neighborhood

35 CPCs play a strategic role in monitoring political loyalty. Ac-
cording to Anderson and Dodd (2009), CPCs are parallel local
institutions created and financed by Ortega, and overseen by his
wife, that try to undermine the independence of local governments
by delivering goods and services conditioned on political support
for the president. Scholars have warned that the government uses
these organizations politically and that under the pretext of fight-
ing poverty, the Sandinista administration is creating a “captive
electorate,” jeopardizing citizen autonomy by means of political
monitoring (e.g., Marti I Puig 2009).

EZEQUIEL GONZALEZ-OCANTOS ET AL.

question also fails to detect differences between subgroups
suggested by the list experiment. The difference in CPC
meeting attendance, certainty about ballot secrecy, and
the positive age association are not present when using
the neighborhood question. Thus, it is not clear that ask-
ing about vote buying in neighborhoods yields superior
estimates to the individual-level question.*©

The Reliability of Models Using
Traditional Obtrusive Measures

If measurement error in the individual and neighbor-
hood vote-buying measures is truly random, then only
the estimates of the average rate of vote buying will be
biased and researchers can successfully model whom par-
ties target for gifts and favors. The deviations from the list
experiment in Tables 2 and 3 suggest the measurement
error is probably correlated with important observed and
unobserved causes of clientelistic relationships. To eval-
uate this claim more rigorously, we conducted multivari-
ate models predicting vote buying using the individual,
neighborhood, and list-experiment measures as depen-
dent variables (Table 4). Since the individual and neigh-
borhood items are binary, Models 1-4 are logistic regres-
sions. In order to generate comparable estimates with
the list experiment, ordinary least squares regressions
were estimated using the list-experiment counts as the
dependent variable (Models 5 and 6).°” In addition to the
independent variables included in the other models, in
Models 5 and 6 we included a dummy variable indicating
the list-experiment condition along with interactions be-
tween the list-experiment condition and all the indepen-
dent variables. These interactions test the magnitude of

6 The validity of the neighborhood measure is further called
into question when direct individual-level vote buying and list-
experiment estimates are tabulated by responses to the neighbor-
hood question. Nearly every individual reporting that she received
a gift or favor also reported vote buying in the neighborhood (only
0.5% did not). However, among people reporting vote buying in
the neighborhood, only 53% received a gift themselves according
to the list experiment. That is, many of these people were reporting
on the behavior of neighbors and not themselves. Among those
people claiming that vote buying did not occur in their neighbor-
hood, nearly 18% received a gift from a party. Further, responses
to the neighborhood-level question provide direct evidence that
respondents sought to strategically implicate the opposing party in
vote buying. PLC sympathizers overwhelmingly (85%) pointed to
the FSLN as the party giving out gifts in their neighborhood, while
only 11% of FSLN sympathizers pointed toward the PLC.

7 Results are virtually identical when using count models (poisson
and negative binomial regressions). For ease of interpretation, OLS
estimates are reported.

“OI Aoppuoo Kayum Krerquauyuoyssdny woss papeo[wmog | °Z OZ “LO6SOPS1

  

8
8
3
8
3
z
3
z
g
8
g
z
x
$
g
g
Pe
o
g
z
5.
z
=
2
@
G
g
s
3
s
8
8
&
2
&
=
z
z
a
zB
°
s
2:
g
2
3
g

 

asu20r] suOUIUIOD aageasD aiqeouidde aqp Kq pausanc8 a1e sajouue WO ‘asm Jo sama 4oy Kaesqe7] BULU KafiAA Wo (suONmUOD-puE-suMDIAUIOD’Ka[uM hae
 

 

 

VOTE BUYING AND SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS 213
TABLE 4 Comparing Vote-Buying Models Using Direct Measures and the List Experiment
Individual Neighborhood List Experiment
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6
Supporter of FSLN (0-1) 1.398** 0.935 0.328 0.187 —0.012 —0.053
(0.64) (0.734) (0.216) (0.222) (0.166) (0.173)
Supporter of PLC (0-1) —0.144 —0.303 0.750*** 0.746*** 0.065 0.018
(0.925) (1.04) (0.243) (0.254) (0.191) (0.204)
Very Poor (0-1) 1.174 1.215* 0.479 0.483 —0.259 —0.214
(0.737) (0.711) (0.49) (0.518) (0.342) (0.331)
Poor (0-1) 0.702 1.043 0.511 0.584 —0.275 —0.174
(0.691) (0.656) (0.467) (0.49) (0.306) (0.288)
Middle/Upper Income (0-1) 0.791 0.862* —0.393 —0.205
(0.478) (0.509) (0.299) (0.288)
Education (0-3) —0.327 —0.51 0.041 0.049 0.152* 0.181*
(0.354) (0.414) (0.137) (0.13) (0.087) (0.092)
Age (1-3) —0.366 —0.432 —0.151 —0.136 0.208** 0.250**
(0.395) (0.432) (0.135) (0.139) (0.103) (0.108)
Female (0-1) —0.304 —0.723 —0.317* —0.349** 0.177 0.176
(0.361) (0.435) (0.162) (0.166) (0.165) (0.163)
Monitor (yes or DK, 0-1) —0.578 0.303 0.323**
(0.467) (0.209) (0.143)
Welfare (0-1) 2.917*** 0.402 —0.051
(0.444) (0.316) (0.306)
Public Works (0-1) 0.562 0.677*** —0.036
(0.558) (0.2) (0.135)
Citizen Power Council (0-1) 0.621 0.107 0.287
(0.459) (0.232) (0.197)
Urban (0-1) 0.656 —0.158 —0.187
(0.609) (0.248) (0.129)
Constant —3.861** —4.5817** —2.033*** —2.459*** 1.687*** 1.760***
(1.497) (1.648) (0.611) (0.667) (0.318) (0.325)
N 1003 993 998 989 995 986
Pseudo/Adjusted R? 0.086 0.281 0.025 0.051 0.043 0.069

 

Notes: *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.

Models 1— are logistic regressions. For income, “no answer/refused” is the excluded category, except for Models 1-2, which also ex-
clude the middle/upper-income group, since zero respondents who refused the income item admitted to vote buying at the individual
level, thereby necessitating the exclusion of two categories for estimation purposes. Models 5-6 are OLS regressions with the list-
experiment count as the dependent variable. For ease of interpretation, all coefficients for Models 5-6 are interactions between the
independent variable and the list-experiment condition (the treatment), since these provide the most comparable estimates. The coef-
ficients for the main independent variables, which predict the number of other items on the list, are omitted but are available upon

request.

adding the vote-buying item to the list for each indepen-
dent variable; that is, the coefficients for these variables
can be interpreted as comparable to the independent vari-
ables in Models 1-4 (Coutts and Jann forthcoming, 23;
Holbrook and Krosnick 2010, 53-55). For ease of com-
parison, only the interacted independent variables are dis-

played, while the noninteracted independent variables are
omitted.°®

38 These latter variables predict the mean number of list items aside
from the vote-buying item, so these coefficients are less central
to the analysis. A common misconception is that list-experiment

asu20r] suOWIUIO aguas aiquouidde aq Kq pausaRo8 axe sapouuE WO f9sn Jo sams 40} Keaqe] aUL{UG Ka[LA Uo (suOgIUOD-puE-suNDIAUOD’Ka[LMKresqu(aut[uoyesdiY) sHOUKDUDD pUE SUMAY, 2H 2G TZZOZI ICE] HO Kresge] UYU K2LLM “WEUETENY ATO 7% SUMO A BIEL IO AUUSHOALUT] £q XOHSOO' I 1OZ'LOGS-OPS ILI N01 AORPUOD Ka [Em Kaeaquauruoyrsduy wsosy PapeO[UMOK *] ‘Z10Z ‘LO6COPSI
214

Models 1, 3, and 5 use basic explanatory variables of
vote buying, similar to the models used in Stokes (2005).
Models 2, 4, and 6 use a more complete set of covari-
ates the literature suggests should matter.*? The results
from Model 1 strongly suggest that vote buying is rare
but primarily targets FSLN supporters. Adding the con-
trols in Model 2 muddies the picture somewhat, but the
reduced point estimates and increased standard errors are
probably due to collinearity between support for FSLN,
poverty, participation in welfare programs, and attend-
ing CPC meetings. The ultimate conclusion reached us-
ing the individual-level measure of vote buying would
be that vote buying primarily targets poor Sandinista
sympathizers.

Shifting to the neighborhood measure of clientelis-
tic behavior in Model 3 almost directly contradicts the
individual-level regression in Model 1 since PLC sup-
porters are more likely to report vote-buying activity. It
also appears that wealthier neighborhoods and males are
marginally more likely to be targeted by vote-buying cam-
paigns, whereas the individual-level model hinted that
poorer people received gifts or favors in exchange for
votes. Adding the covariates in Model 4 does little to
change the point estimates from Model 3, and in contrast
to Model 2, the public works dummy is now highly sig-
nificant, and the welfare coefficient is much smaller and
not significant.

Not only do the individual and neighborhood models
lead to contradictory results, but the models using list-
experiment data also paint a very different picture of the
dispensation of gifts in Nicaragua. In contrast to the direct
models, both Models 5 and 6 suggest that gifts are given to
all types of partisans and that income is not very predictive
of the receipt of gifts. Furthermore, both Models 5 and 6
point toward age as an important positive factor in vote
buying, while the direct models produced nonsignificant
negative coefficients. Finally, education generates a posi-

estimates cannot be used in multivariate analyses, since the re-
searcher does not know which particular individuals respond to
which items on the list (e.g., Kuklinski et al. 1997). While it is
true that researchers cannot make such individual-level inferences,
subgroup-level inferences with controls are possible. Thus, the in-
teraction coefficients in Table 4 represent the group-level averages
(similar to Table 2) while at the same time controlling for the
overlap among groups.

°° Tn order to avoid dropping respondents who refused to an-
swer the income question since such respondents are also likely
to edit their answers regarding the sensitive vote-buying items (see
Table 3), income dummy variables are included. In Models 3-6,
those who refused to answer the income question serve as the
excluded baseline category, while in Models 1-2 the middle/upper-
income dummy was also excluded, since zero respondents who re-
fused the income item indicated personally receiving a gift, thereby
complicating estimation.

EZEQUIEL GONZALEZ-OCANTOS ET AL.

tive coefficient that is marginally significant in Models 5
and 6, which contrasts with the negative coefficients in
Models 1 and 2 and positive coefficients in Model 4 (none
significant). While this marginally significant result is un-
expected, it may reflect the fact that, controlling for other
factors, the more educated are more likely to be involved
in politics and therefore more likely to be exposed to po-
litical tactics such as vote buying. The difference between
the list experiment and direct question could be due to
increased sensitivity to social desirability pressures with
regard to elections by the more educated.”

Theoretically, one of the most important findings in
Model 6 is that doubt about the secrecy of the ballot is a
very strong predictor of vote buying; on average over 32%
of those who think that their vote can be monitored or ex-
press doubts about ballot secrecy received a gift or favor.
In stark contrast, the direct models produced nonsignifi-
cant results, with Model 2 producing a negative coefficient
and Model 4a positive coefficient for the monitor variable.
Although the coefficient for the CPC attendance variable
is substantively large and consistent with field research,
its collinearity with several other variables in the model
probably accounts for its lack of statistical significance in
Model 6. While both Models 2 and 4 produce similarly
positive nonsignificant results for the CPC variable, only
in the individual-level model is the coefficient substan-
tively large (0.6 logits versus 0.1 logits).

Consequently, researchers should be very cautious
when constructing models relying on obtrusive measures
of vote buying. Not only do the models underestimate
the extent to which vote buying occurs, but also the re-
sults are highly dependent on model specification. Signs
flipped for important variables such as party affiliation,
income, and whether voters think they can be moni-
tored. The models using direct measures also failed to
uncover factors that the list experiment, theory, and field-
work suggest are important. Thus, the measurement error
from social desirability bias in obtrusive measures of vote
buying does not appear to be purely random and biases
results.

Discussion

This article has shown that list experiments offer a
technique that solves some bias issues by offering

“© An alternative explanation is that more educated respondents feel
they should report greater amounts of political participation, so it is
possible that the list experiment is biased for educated respondents.
The existing literature on list experiments provides no evidence for
this thesis, but it is possible.

“OI Aoppuoo Kayum Krerquauyuoyssdny woss papeo[wmog | °Z OZ “LO6SOPS1

  

8
8
3
8
3
z
3
z
g
8
g
z
x
$
g
g
Pe
o
g
z
5.
z
=
2
@
G
g
s
3
s
8
8
&
2
&
=
z
z
a
zB
°
s
2:
g
2
3
g

 

asu20r] suOUIUIOD aageasD aiqeouidde aqp Kq pausanc8 a1e sajouue WO ‘asm Jo sama 4oy Kaesqe7] BULU KafiAA Wo (suONmUOD-puE-suMDIAUIOD’Ka[uM hae
VOTE BUYING AND SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

respondents a high degree of anonymity when answering
questions about vote buying. However, the list experi-
ment is unlikely to purge all social desirability bias from
responses and the point estimate is likely to constitute a
lower bound. Vote buying may be such a sensitive topic
that some respondents may be reluctant to “tell the truth”
even when provided a forum where it is literally impossi-
ble to determine which individuals report vote buying.*!
This greater sensitivity to stigma is likely to exist in con-
texts where social sanctions, political violence, or legal
punishment are possible outcomes from admissions of
vote buying.

This inability to identify particular persons admit-
ting to stigmatized behaviors does not prevent researchers
from conducting subgroup analysis, even using multi-
variate techniques. Within each subgroup, respondents
are randomly assigned to treatment and control lists, so
researchers can understand the average response from cat-
egories of people. Such estimation techniques will be sta-
tistically inefficient, but they will have lessened social de-
sirability bias and allow researchers to map the contours of
vote buying. The greater efficiency gained by using direct
questions about individual- and neighborhood-level vote
buying comes at the cost of underestimating aggregate-
level gift dispensation and possibly misleading inferences
concerning the targeting of such goods and favors. This
bias-efficiency trade-off suggests that researchers desir-
ing accurate models of whom campaigns target with vote
buying should ideally conduct list experiments on very
large samples.

Nicaragua is the second poorest country in Latin
America and political parties across the ideological
spectrum have recently demonstrated high levels of
vote-buying activities. Given these characteristics, we are
confident that the extent of vote buying is clearly under-
estimated by direct measures and that the list experiment
provides a more accurate assessment at the aggregate level.
However, our results should not be taken to imply that
vote buying is ubiquitous in Latin America. Low reported
levels of vote buying using traditional surveys may reflect
a genuine lack of illicit campaign activity. Our point is
that social desirability bias is an alternative explanation
that is not easily dismissed.

In order to gain greater confidence in the external
validity of the results yielded by the list experiment in
Nicaragua, more explicit comparative research using list
experiments is necessary in the developing world. One
line of future research is to identify the conditions that

4! The exceptions to this rule are respondents who report the highest
possible value in the treatment condition. For this reason, low-
incidence categories should be included in the control list.

215

increase or decrease the impact of social desirability bias.
Our article shows that the difference in reporting between
obtrusive and unobtrusive measures of vote buying is sta-
tistically significant among females, older voters, better-
educated individuals, those living in rural and urban ar-
eas, and middle-income voters. This evidence suggests
that poorer voters may be more inclined to regard vote
buying as “politics as usual,” as an inherent part of their
social and political problem-solving networks (Auyero
2001). As a result, the poor may be less inclined to lie
about receiving gifts or favors during campaigns. The na-
ture and shape of the stigma associated with vote buying
is a topic worth understanding in greater depth since it
will help to guide attempts to curb the practice.

Our research uncovered two key mechanisms for
vote-buying linkages in the Nicaraguan context: (1) vot-
ers’ perception that parties can monitor their vote and
(2) voters’ participation or proximity to state-sponsored
community organizations like the CPCs. The latter mech-
anism could be a subtype of the first one since these in-
stitutionalized interactions between voters and the state
via the councils can offer politicians an infrastructure
of surveillance different from that offered by partisan
electoral machines. The literature relying on quantita-
tive analyses of survey data has more often than not in-
corporated successful monitoring efforts in the formal
models that inspire that research, but it has rarely tested
these assumptions systematically. In this article, we of-
fer systematic evidence that shows that these theoretical
intuitions are correct and should be at the forefront of
future research on vote buying in Latin America and else-
where.

References

Anderson, L. E., and L. C. Dodd. 2005. Learning Democ-
racy: Citizen Engagement and Electoral Choice in Nicaragua,
1990-2001. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Anderson, L. E., and L. C. Dodd. 2009. “Nicaragua: Progress
amid Regress?” Journal of Democracy 20(3): 153-67. Article
174. Nicaraguan Electoral Law. www.cse.gob.ni (March 17,
2010).

Auyero, J. 2001. Poor People’s Politics: Peronist Survival Networks
and the Legacy of Evita. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Avendario, F. 2006. Manual de Participaci6n Ciudadana. Man-
agua: Fundacion Konrad Adenauer.

Bachman, J., and P. O’Malley. 1981. “When Four Months Equal
a Year: Inconsistencies in Student Reports of Drug Use.”
Public Opinion Quarterly 45: 536-48.

Berinsky, A. 1999. “The Two Faces of Public Opinion.” Ameri-
can Journal of Political Science 43(4): 1209-30.

Booth, J., and P. Richard. 2006. “Revolution’s Legacy: Resid-
ual Effects on Nicaraguan Participation and Attitudes in

“OI Aoppuoo Kayum Krerquauyuoyssdny woss papeo[wmog | °Z OZ “LO6SOPS1

  

8
8
3
8
3
z
3
z
g
8
g
z
x
$
g
g
Pe
o
g
z
5.
z
=
2
@
G
g
s
3
s
8
8
&
2
&
=
z
z
a
zB
°
s
2:
g
2
3
g

 

asu20r] suOUIUIOD aageasD aiqeouidde aqp Kq pausanc8 a1e sajouue WO ‘asm Jo sama 4oy Kaesqe7] BULU KafiAA Wo (suONmUOD-puE-suMDIAUIOD’Ka[uM hae
216

Comparative Context.” Latin American Politics and Society
48(2): 117-40.

Bradburn, N., S. Sudman, E. Blair, and C. Stocking. 1978.
“Question Threat and Response Bias.” Public Opinion Quar-
terly 42(2): 221-34.

Brusco, V., M. Nazareno, and S. Stokes. 2004. “Vote Buying in
Argentina.” Latin American Research Review 39(2): 66-88.

Calvo, E., and M. V. Murillo. 2004. “Who Delivers? Partisan
Clients in the Argentine Electoral Market.” American Journal
of Political Science 48(4): 742-57.

Consejo Supremo Electoral. 2010. www.cse.gob.ni. (March 17).

Coutts, E., and B. Jann. Forthcoming. “Sensitive Questions in
Online Surveys: Experimental Results for the Randomized
Response Technique (RRT) and the Unmatched Count Tech-
nique (UCT).” Sociological Methods & Research.

Cox, G., and M. McCubbins. 1986. “Electoral Politics as
a Redistributive Game.” Journal of Politics 48(2): 370-
89.

DeMaio, T. 1984. “Social Desirability and Survey Measure-
ment: A Review.” In Surveying Subjective Phenomenon, ed.
C. Turner and E. Martin. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 257—
82.

Dixit, A., and J. Londregan. 1996. “The Determinants of Suc-
cess of Special Interests in Redistributive Politics.” Journal of
Politics 58(4): 1132-55.

Dye, D., and D. Close. 2004. “Patrimonialism and Economic
Policy in the Aleman Administration.” In Undoing Democ-
racy: The Politics of Electoral Caudillismo, ed. D. Close
and K. Deonandan. Lanham, MA: Lexington Books, 119-
4l.

Greene, Samuel R. 2010. “Learning the Wrong Lessons
about Nicaraguan Democracy: A Response to Ander-
son and Dodd.” Journal of Democracy (web-only). http:
/fwww.journalofdemocracy.org/.

Guzman, L., and A. Pinto. 2008. Democracia y Partidos en
Nicaragua. Managua: Netherlands Institute for Multiparty
Democracy.

Holbrook, A. L., and J. A. Krosnick. 2010. “Social Desirability
Bias in Voter Turnout Reports: Tests Using the Item Count
Technique.” Public Opinion Quarterly 74(1): 37-67.

Huntington, Samuel P. 1968. Political Order in Changing Soci-
eties. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Johnson, T., and F. Van deVijver. 2003. “Social Desirability Bias
in Cross-Cultural Research.” In Cross-Cultural Survey Meth-
ods, ed. J. Harkness, FE Van deVijver, and P. Mohler. Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 195-204.

Kane, J., S. Craig, and K. Wald. 2004. “Religion and Presiden-
tial Politics in Florida: A List Experiment.” Social Science
Quarterly 85(2): 281-93.

King, G., R. Keohane, and S. Verba. 1994. Designing Social In-
quiry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Kitschelt, H. 2000. “Linkages between Citizens and Politicians in
Democratic Politics.” Comparative Political Studies 33 (6-7):
845-79.

Kitschelt, H., and S. Wilkinson, eds. 2007. “Citizen-Politician
Linkages: An Introduction.” In Patrons, Clients, and Policies:
Patterns of Democratic Accountability and Political Competi-
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1-49.

EZEQUIEL GONZALEZ-OCANTOS ET AL.

Kuklinski, J.. M. Cobb, and M. Gilens. 1997. “Racial Atti-
tudes and the ‘New South.” Journal of Politics 59(2): 323—
49.

Kuklinski, J., P. Sniderman, K. Knight, T. Piazza, P. Tetlock,
G. Lawrence, and B. Mellers. 1997. “Racial Prejudice and
Attitudes toward Affirmative Action.” American Journal of
Political Science 41(2): 402-19.

Lehoucq, E. 2007. “When Does a Market for Votes Emerge?”
In Elections for Sale: The Causes and Consequences of Vote
Buying, ed. Frederic Charles Schaffer. Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner, 33-46.

Levitsky, S. 2003. Transforming Labor Based Parties in Latin
America: Argentine Peronism in Comparative Perspective.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Magaloni, B. 2006. Voting for Autocracy: Hegemonic Party Sur-
vival and Its Demise in Mexico. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Marenco, E. 2004. Nicaragua: Entre el patrimonialismo de los

Somozay la corrupcion de Aleman. Managua: Fondo Editorial
CIRA.

Marti I Puig, S. 2008. “El regreso de Ortega: Los primeros pasos
de su segunda administracién.” Revista de Ciencia Politica
28(1): 287-303.

Marti I Puig, S. 2009. “Nicaragua 2008: Polarizacién y pactos.”
Revista de Ciencia Politica 29(2): 515-31.

Millett, R. 1977. Guardians of the Dynasty. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis
Books.

Nadeau, R., and R. Niemi. 1995. “Educated Guesses:
The Process of Answering Factual Knowledge Ques-
tions in Surveys.” Public Opinion Quarterly 59(3): 323—
46.

Nitchter, $. 2008. “Vote Buying or Turnout Buying? Machine
Politics and the Secret Ballot.” American Political Science
Review 102(1): 19-31.

Philipson, Tomas J., and James M. Snyder. 1996. “Equilibrium
and Efficiency in an Organized Vote Market.” Public Choice
89: 245-65,

Presser, S., and L. Stinson. 1998. “Data Collection Mode
and Social Desirability Bias in Self-Reported Religious
Attendance.” American Sociological Review 63(1): 137-
45.

Schaffer, C., ed. 2007. Elections for Sale: The Causes and Conse-
quences of Vote Buying. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.

Schedler, A. 2002. “The Menu of Manipulation.” Journal of
Democracy 13(2): 36-50.

Seligson, M., A. Cordova, J. Donoso, D. Moreno Morales, D.
Orces, and V. Schwarz Blum. 2006. Democracy Audit: Bolivia
2006 Report. Latin American Public Opinion Project. http:
/fwww.vanderbilt.edu/lapop/.

Silver, B., B. Anderson, and P. Abramson. 1986. “Who Over-
reports Voting?” American Political Science Review 80(2):
613-24,

Stokes, $. 2005. “Perverse Accountability: A Formal Model of
Machine Politics with Evidence from Argentina.” American
Political Science Review 99(3): 315-25.

Stokes, S. 2007. “Political Clientelism.” In The Oxford Handbook
of Comparative Politics, ed. C. Boix and S. Stokes. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 604—27.

ssdny wos papeorumog ‘| °Z 10% “LO6S0rS1

  

asua0r7] SuOUNIOD aAueaID aiquoydde ay) Kq pausano? axe safouse YO ‘asm Jo Sains Jog KsesqLT BULL Aa[LA UO (suONmpUCD-puE-suuaIAUoD ca[iMAaesquaur{uoysduy) suOURDUOS puZ Sua), 241 22g ‘[ZZOE/I I/ZZ] HO KsesQeT aUYC KalLAy ‘MELEE BKeIOS Ip SOUMOA BALE IO AALSHBALIPL Kq XOHSOO' | 1OZLOGS-OS 1/1 HI OL AOp/UOD Kaye Kae,
VOTE BUYING AND SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

Tourangeau, R., and T. Smith. 1996. “Asking Sensitive Ques-
tions: The Impact of Data Collection Mode, Question
Format, and Question Context.” Public Opinion Quarterly
60(2): 275-304.

Tourangeau, R., and T. Yan. 2007. “Sensitive Questions in Sur-
veys.” Psychological Bulletin 133(5): 859-83.

Transparency International. 2004. “Vote Buying.” In Global

217

Corruption Report 2004. Sterling, VA: Pluto Press, 76-88.
http: //www.transparency.org/publications/ger/gcr2004.

Vargas, O. 2004. Veinticinco afios después (1979-2004): De los
comandantes a los banqueros. Managua: Centro de Estudios
de la Realidad Nacional.

World Bank. 2005. “World Development Indicators.” http:
//www.worldbank.org.

“OI Aoppuoo Kayum Krerquauyuoyssdny woss papeo[wmog | °Z OZ “LO6SOPS1

  

8
8
3
8
3
z
3
z
g
8
g
z
x
$
g
g
Pe
o
g
z
5.
z
=
2
@
G
g
s
3
s
8
8
&
2
&
=
z
z
a
zB
°
s
2:
g
2
3
g

 

asu20r] suOUIUIOD aageasD aiqeouidde aqp Kq pausanc8 a1e sajouue WO ‘asm Jo sama 4oy Kaesqe7] BULU KafiAA Wo (suONmUOD-puE-suMDIAUIOD’Ka[uM hae
