 

 

i
z
-

Applied Psycholinguistics 14 (1993), 445-47]
Printed in the United States of America

Social biases toward children with
speech and language impairments:
A correlative causal model of
language limitations

MABEL L. RICE, PAMELA A. HADLEY, and AMY L. ALEXANDER
University of Kansas

4

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Mabel L. Rice, Child Language Program, University of Kansas, 1082 Dole Center, Lawrence,
KS 66045

ABSTRACT

This study explores adults’ attitudes toward children with limited linguistic competency. Four
groups of adult judges participated in this study: kindergarten teachers, women matched for
age and education level with the teachers, undergraduate college students, and speech-lan-
guage pathologists. The judges listened to audiotaped samples of preschool children’s speech.
Two triads of children were formed, matched for age, gender, and intelligence, but differing
in communication abilities. The adults responded to questionnaire items addressing child
attributes (¢.g., intelligence, social maturity) and parental attributes (e.g., education level,
SES). Systematic biases were revealed toward children with limited communication abilities.
The biases are interpreted as reflective of adults’ expectations for children’s language. It is
argued that adults call upon a correlative causal model of language acquisition to interpret
individual differences in children’s language abilities. Negative social and academic conse-
quences of such misinterpretations are discussed.

It is widely accepted that language use reveals social identity which, in turn,
can be associated with social attitudes. Language use involves conventions
of linguistic discourse, pronunciation patterns, lexical selection, and the
choice of which language or dialect to speak. These can, individually or in
combination, trigger assumptions on the part of the listener about the
speaker’s ethnic origins, social class, socioeconomic level, and personal
attributes, such as intelligence, diligence, and sociability. The associations
between language use and presumed personal characteristics of the speaker
are worked out most thoroughly for speakers of substandard dialects or
nondominant languages. In these cases, listener biases are thought to tap
into underlying attitudes toward nondominant social groups, such as recent
immigrants (Hakuta, 1986), lower socioeconomic classes (Heath, 1983),
ethnic discrimination (Grosjean, 1982; Lambert, Hodgson, Gardner, & Fil-
lenbaum, 1960; McLaughlin, 1978; Williams, 1973b), or racial prejudices

© 1993 Cambridge University Press 0142-7164/93 $5.00 + .00
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 446
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

(Taylor, 1973; Terrell & Terrell, 1983). Interpretations have focused on
the associated cultural stereotypes as mediators of linguistic attitudes, a
perspective put most succinctly by McLaughlin (1978, p. 3), who stated:
“This hostility toward bilingualism has nothing to do with language as such.
The hostility is directed not at language but at culture.”

What is not captured in these studies is the social attitude displayed
toward individuals who may be of the mainstream cultural identity, but
who have not mastered their native language - that is, individuals who have
speech and language impairments. These people are of interest for several
reasons. First, because these individuals do not speak a conventional dialect
but do cross racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic lines, any possible negative
social biases could not be grounded in attitudes toward aggregates of people
defined by income, race, or sociocultural identity. Negative attitudes to-
ward speakers with speech/language impairment could reveal additional
sources of attitude formation in the case of nonstandard language. Perhaps
some portion of negative preconceptions toward dialect speakers and bilin-
guals (although surely not all) is attributable to general, socially widespread
notions about language difference. These notions could lead listeners to
attribute detectable differences between expected and observed linguistic
forms to limitations in individual capacity and restricted environmental
resources.

A second reason to identify possible social biases toward speech/lan-
guage impairment is that it would enrich our interpretation of communica-
tive impairment and enhance the effectiveness of intervention strategies.
To the extent that speech and language impairments are associated with
negative social judgments, individuals with such limitations have, in effect,
two problems to cope with: they have limited linguistic skill in their native
language, which is compounded by the additional problem of negative as-
sumptions on the part of their listeners about their other psychological and
personal capacities (cf. Rice, 1992). Remedial methods, then, would need
to address the sociocultural context as well as an individual’s linguistic
competencies. /

In this study we explored adults’ attitudes toward children who have
limited linguistic competency. Given that teachers and speech-language pa-
thologists assume responsibility for the education of these children and the
remediation of their linguistic deficiencies, we were interested in the nature
of their assumptions about the children’s personal attributes. Further, we
were interested in the attitudes of adults who were not directly involved in
service to children as indicators of more widespread social assumptions
about communicative limitations. Four groups of adult judges, differing in
professional identities and educational levels, were included. Thus, it was
possible to examine the pervasiveness of possible biases (i.e., whether nega-
tive assumptions were evident across age and educational levels, and if such
assumptions were ameliorated by specialized professional training). The
findings reveal systematic biases toward youngsters with speech/language
impairment, which become more pronounced with greater impairment.

ge

~

ae
 

 

 

eS baie 22288

Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 447
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

Attitudes toward speakers of nonstandard dialects

The classic studies of attitudes toward language groups were conducted by
Lambert and his colleagues (1960). They introduced a viable methodology
and established that listeners reveal social biases in the traits they attribute
to speakers. Their methodology was the matched-guise design in which
perfectly bilingual speakers record a passage, first in one of their languages
and then in the other. Thus, the speaker is the same, but the language
differs. Listeners were then asked to rate the speakers on personal charac-
teristics, such as intelligence, leadership, character, and so on. Lambert et
al. demonstrated that listeners ranked the dominant language (English)
version higher in desirable personal attributes than they did the nondomi-
nant language (French) version, thereby revealing that the listeners did not
realize they were evaluating the same individuals. Instead, they seemed
to project their attitudes toward the group of dominant or nondominant
language speakers. These findings inspired an extensive sociolinguistic liter-
ature in which negative social attitudes toward groups of nonstandard lan-
guage speakers have been repeatedly confirmed and linked to associated
cultural stereotypes (cf. Grosjean, 1982; Hakuta, 1986; Shuy & Fasold,
1973).

These attitudes are now thought to be constructed from peoples’ experi-
ences and cognitions (Giles & Coupland, 1991). As listeners process the
language in such judgment tasks, they bring to their interpretations social
representations associated with the speaker. These social categories are, in
turn, constructed from accumulated information obtained from observa-
tions of, interactions with, and learning about individual speakers (Hamil-
ton, 1981). Thus, the process of attributing personal characteristics to
speakers is an active, dynamic, and complex one which draws upon the
considerable depth of a listener’s social experiences and the ways the listener
has conceptualized those experiences.

Attitudes toward child speakers

Relatively little is known about the effect of individual differences in chil-
dren’s language performance on listener judgments of related child attri-
butes. In the few studies available, judgments of intelligence are linked to
language competencies. Burroughs and Tomblin (1990) explored the social
impact of language variation within the normal range of development by
sampling the language of 35 children, aged 3;0 to 6;6 years, presenting
2-minute samples of children’s speech to four adult judges (undergraduate
students) and asking them to complete a semantic differential rating scale
for each sample. The judges were told that the children were 4;6 to 5;6
years of age. Factor analyses produced a maturity factor composed of
descriptors such as “intelligent,” “independent,” and “mature.” Variance in
the maturity ratings was predicted by speech and language features of the
samples — phonological accuracy and average number of words per turn.
The authors concluded that adults are “likely to view an individual with
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 448
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

immature grammatical and phonological skills as low in cognitive capacity”
(p. 492). Their normative speech samples did not allow for a direct test of
this prediction, nor did their limited sample of adults allow for estimates of
the generalizability of their judgments. The study reported here is designed
to address these limitations.

The association of child intelligence with child speech and language profi-
ciency would be especially important in educational settings, where teacher
judgments could translate into immediate educational consequences. In a
study in which student teachers were asked to evaluate speech samples of
third grade boys, the boys with “good voices” were perceived as more intelli-
gent than boys with “poor voices” (Seligman, Tucker, & Lambert, 1972).
To the extent that teachers’ attitudes are constructed from their experiences
and cognitions (Giles & Coupland, 1991) and conform to general cognitive
processes of attitude formation (Hamilton, 1981), it would not be surpris-
ing to find that their judgments reflect general social expectations. This is
consistent with evidence that teachers may carry mainstream negative atti-
tudes toward minority groups and dialectal variations into their classrooms.
Teachers are sensitive to dialectal differences, and they tend to regard chil-
dren who speak nonstandard dialects less favorably than those who use
standard grammar and discourse conventions (Heath, 1983; Reck, Reck, &
Keefe, 1987; Taylor, 1973; Williams, 1973b). Thus, before individual per-
sonal qualities are known, adults (including teachers) may have formed
some assumptions about children’s intellectual abilities and other attributes.
Because the communication skills of speech- and language-impaired chil-
dren do not conform to social expectations, it is likely that they will also be
victims of such preconceptions.

Limited communication skills of specific language-impaired children

Children with specific language impairment (SLI) are those who are other-
wise developing according to age expectations, but who have significant
deficits in speech and language skills. Obvious causal factors, such as hear-
ing loss, mental retardation, and deviant social development, have been
ruled out. Although there is considerable individual variation within this
group of children, some characteristics can be considered typical. They
tend to acquire first words and first word combinations at a later age than
their normally developing peers. Morphosyntactic features, Such as tense
and agreement, may be slow to appear, relative to more general syntactic
indices such as mean length of utterance. Speech production (phonological
acquisition) may also be impaired, although not necessarily so (cf. Rice,
1991).

At the preschool level, relative to nonimpaired children of the same age,
SLI children’s spontaneous utterances typically have a reduced length of
utterance, restricted vocabulary, a tendency to omit the small functor words
and morphemes, and, sometimes, limited intelligibility. One impression
could be that the language of these children is like that of younger, nor-
mally developing children. However, there are two cautions that apply to
 

ipo sent oct ieaisnlsaa acupressure

Applied Psycholinguistics [4:4 449
Rice et ai.: Social biases toward children

this characterization. First, the technical accuracy is a matter of dispute
(cf. Curtiss, Katz, & Tallal, 1992; Lahey, Liebergott, Chesnick, Menyuk, &
Adams, 1992; Leonard, 1989; Rice & Oetting, 1991). Second, it suggests
that the children might simply be talking “baby talk” or some kind of “cute”
speech, as in the case of children who lisp or have minor mispronunciations
(and yet still show up in television commercials). Although these minor
deviations can be considered charming, few who know SLI children, with
their more extensive limitations, would characterize their style of language
use in this way.

In the sense that SLI children have limited communication skills relative
to their same-age, English-proficient (EP) playmates, SLI children can be
compared to children learning English as a second language (ESL). Obser-
vations in a preschool setting indicate parallel findings for these two groups
of children, relative to the way they adjust their use of language to interact
with their peers and the way their peers respond to them (Rice, Sell, &
Hadley, 1991). These children are less likely than their EP playmates of the
same age to initiate conversational turns with their peers, and they are more
likely to shorten their responses and to be avoided as the recipient of an
initiation. In sum, both groups of preschoolers with limited language skills
were less well integrated into the classroom discourse interactions than were
EP children - a finding consistent with other reports of ESL children’s
limited conversational participation in preschool classrooms (Hirshler,
1991; Tabors, 1987). Rice (1992) interpreted these findings as suggesting
that children with restricted communicative repertoires can encounter social
consequences at the level of participation in peer play activities. These
adjustments could, in turn, be perceived as “social immaturity” by adult
observers who are not familiar with a child’s language limitations.

School-entry risk for SLI children

It is when children enter kindergarten that teacher attitudes may be particu-
larly critical, for the transition to school brings the expectation that they
have mastered basic communication and social interaction skills (Hains,
Fowler, Schwartz, Kottwitz, & Rosenkoetter, 1990). This expectation is
clearly expressed by the 7,000 kindergarten teachers sampled in the recent
survey by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
When asked to report “serious problems” in children’s readiness for school,
teachers overwhelmingly cited “deficiency in language” (Boyer, 1991).

New evidence suggests that it is at the kindergarten level that SLI children
are also likely to fail. In a prospective longitudinal study of SLI children,
Catts (1990) found that these children are less likely than their non-SLI
peers (of the same age and intellectual aptitudes) to be promoted to regular
first grade at the end of kindergarten. He studied a group of kindergarten
children referred for speech and language evaluations and reported that
33% of kindergarten children who were suspected of speech and language
problems repeated kindergarten or were placed in developmental first
grades. (Developmental first grades provide an “in-between” transitional
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 450
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

year with further preparation for the regular first grade curriculum.) Of
the 35 children with significant language impairments, 17 (or 49%) did not
advance to regular first grade classrooms.

Judgments of “social immaturity” are often implicated in the recommen-
dations for nonpromotion to first grade. Informal discussions with the
teachers in the Catts (1990) study indicate that many of their placement
decisions for the SLI children were based on perceived social immaturity.
Similarly, Walsh (1989) reported that the decision not to promote a child
to regular first grade can depend on the teacher’s estimate of the child’s
social maturity. Teachers’ most common explanation of why children were
not promoted was as follows: children who are academically advanced,
but socially immature, are promoted to transitional first grades, whereas
children who are academically slow are retained in kindergarten. Thus, even
if the child’s academic prerequisites are established, they are vulnerable to
special tracking. Furthermore, the determination of a child’s social maturity
seems to be largely based on a teacher’s subjective impressions. Thus, if a
child’s limited verbal interactive competency is interpreted by the teacher as
social immaturity or limited cognitive competency, that child may not be
promoted to regular first grade and thereby would be vulnerable to the
likely negative effects on self-esteem and dubious educational outcomes of
the developmental first grade placement (cf. Peterson, DeGracie, & Ayabe,
1987). This bias, of course, could be operative toward children speaking
nonstandard English or with a limited English repertoire, as well as SLI
children (Cummins, 1984).

In addition to teachers, SLI children receive specialized instruction from
speech-language pathologists, who are professionally trained in speech/
language disorders and etiologies, assessment, and intervention. As part of
their training, these specialists learn to differentiate speech and language
disorders from characteristics of general intellectual abilities or social sta-
tus. Information about the way they make blind judgments of variations in
young children’s speech and language competency is not available, yet it
could help illuminate the contribution of specialized training relative to
general social expectations.

To summarize, it is well known that adults attribute personal characteris-
tics to speakers on the basis of variations in speech and language. Histori-
cally, explanations for biased attributions have focused on the ethnic or
sociolinguistic group affiliation of the speaker. Little is known about
adults’ judgments of child speaker characteristics. Because adults are instru-
mental judges of children’s intellect and social maturity, it is important to
learn more about their ability to detect variations in children’s speech and
language competencies and how they interpret those variations in terms of
speaker attributes. Children with SLI demonstrate deviations from ex-
pected levels of speech and language competency and, therefore, are inter-
esting test cases for investigation. The identification of systematic adult
assumptions based on children’s speech samples and of plausible underlying
mechanisms of bias formation would have possible applications to other
 

 

Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 451
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

child speakers of nonstandard forms, such as ESL and dialect-speaking
children.

METHOD

In order to test listener judgments of variations in children’s speech and
language directly, the present study adapted the Lambert methodology. In
the matched-guise procedure, the same speaker presented the same informa-
tion in two different languages or dialects. Because it is not possible to get
a preschoo! child to switch from a “normal” to “disordered” dialect, an
adaptation was necessary; thus, different children’s voices were used in the
experimental stimuli. In order to minimize possible differences in pitch or
voice quality, ’as well as possible gender effects, two triads of children were -
formed, matched for age, gender, and intelligence, but differing in lan-
guage skill. To keep the content of the utterances as similar as possible, the
children were asked to count and to describe a toy, a procedure that allowed ,
for a general content match, although not an exact one.

Sample children

Six children were selected to provide short speech samples for the stimulus
tape. All children demonstrated normal intelligence as measured by the
Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children (K-ABC) (Kaufman & Kauf-
man, 1983); one child demonstrated performance in the low-average range.
None of the children had physical or visual handicaps, and their hearing
was within normal! limits.

Two same-sex triads were formed, one male and one female. Children
were matched within the triads on age (within 5 months) and IQ. Each
triad consisted of a child with a speech and language impairment (S&L), a
child with a speech impairment only (SI), and a child with normally devel-
oping speech and language skills (ND). Thus, three levels of communicative
ability were represented in each triad. The SI and S&L children were en-
rolled in a language intervention preschool and were thought to be typical
of children receiving clinical services for speech and language impairment.

Children classified as SI demonstrated one or more of the following
criteria: (a) multiple articulation errors on the Goldman-Fristoe Test of
Articulation (Goldman & Fristoe, 1986), (b) failure to master at least three
age-appropriate phonemes, or (c) speech errors that adversely affected their
intelligibility in conversational speech. It is important to note that these
children’s speech errors were more extensive than lisping or saying “wab-
bit.” Children classified as S&L met the previous SI criteria and, in addi-
tion, at least two of the following language-impaired criteria: (a) a score
below one standard deviation on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-
Revised (PPVT-R) (Dunn & Dunn, 1981), (b) a score below the 25th percen-
tile on the Reynell Developmental Language Scale~Revised (Reynell, 1985),
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 452
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

or (c) a mean length of utterance (MLU) below the predicted range for
chronological age (Miller, 1981). Children selected for the normal language
group demonstrated age-appropriate skills on all standardized speech and
language measures.

Stimulus tape

An audiotaped sample of each child’s spontaneous speech was collected.
Three tasks were used to elicit the sample: counting, toy description, and
event description (i.c., going to McDonald’s). The original speech samples
for each child were approximately 3 minutes in length. However, pilot
testing suggested that the procedures were too long when samples were used
in their entirety. Thus, samples were edited to approximately 1% minutes
in length, including only the counting and toy description tasks. This sam-
ple length compared favorably with. the conventional 2-minute samples,
found to be long enough for adult raters to make behavioral judgments
(Williams, 1973a).

The samples were arranged on the stimulus tape in two orders of presen-
tation. Children within the same triad were grouped together to facilitate
within-triad comparisons. Conversely, children within the same language
group were separated on the tape. The two orders were: Order 1 (SI male,
ND male, S&L male, ND female, SI female, S&L female), and Order 2 (SI
female, S&L female, ND female, S&L male, SI male, ND male).

The children’s experimental samples were analyzed for MLU and percent-
age of intelligible utterances using the Systematic Assessment of Language
Transcripts (SALT) (Miller & Chapman, 1990). SALT analyses confirmed
that the two ND children’s samples contained the highest MLUs and intelli-
gibility scores. The MLUs for the S&L children were considerably lower, as
expected. The female SI child had only a mild speech impairment, and
therefore her percentage of intelligible utterances was higher than that of
the male SI child. In general, the communication skills of the SI children
fell between those of the ND and the S&L children, as intended. (See Table
1, for measures of the children’s general speech and language skills, drawn
from tests and more extensive spontaneous samples, and a description of
the audiotaped samples.)

The sample editing was carried out with the goal of maximizing the
comparability of content across the samples wherever possible, while main-
taining the naturalness of the interaction. The entire transcripts of each
sample are provided in Appendix 1. The counting sequence was standard
across samples; accuracy was not predictive of “normal” status. There are
no obvious content cues available to signal group affiliation.

Listener judges

A total of 283 adult raters participated in this two-part study. The subjects
were drawn from four adult groups: kindergarten teachers, a comparison
group of noneducators matched for gender and educational levels, under-
graduate college students, and speech-language pathologists.
ade] snpnuins oy] uo ajduies asendsue] Wo saouBseyIN a[qrsyjaiut pue sjojdiuoo yo uonjiodolg,

-adei snnuins ay} uo adures oenZue] soursoyn jo YISUS] WIA;

(O86 ‘2OISLLY 2 ULUIPJOH) LOE Moy JO 3Sa], 9O}SLJ-URWIP[OH UO YUeI ef195I9q,

“BLIAD (1861) Sa Aq pareynoyes (ode) [elustutiedxa ay} ou) a}dures aFendury souvssyIn OO] Wry eouBIA}IN JO ysuay URI,
“(SR6T ‘T2UAPU) Pastaay-sopeos adensur’y] [equowdojaasq, [Ppudey uo (| = GS ‘0 = WX) $21098 pivpuris daIssoldxg /aatidaooy
“(1R6T ‘UUNC] 3 UUNC]) postasy-3say AreINquooA aNd APOgead UO $31098 PIBPUBIS,

‘(EQG6] ‘UBUTNLY ZW ULUNEY) USIP] 10jJ Aloyyeg Juauissassy UPUTNeY oy} UO aysodurod BUISSAI0Id,

‘pared avensuey pue yseads = apg ‘ATU posteduyy yooods = Jg ‘aden8uy] surdoyeaap Ayfeutlou = CN,

 

 

 

 

OH9E9E 9E°C %T 96°C VI-/vi+ Oct SOT TSS 9 a
% 08 SPP TE Srp € +/01+ sol 9eI is $9 i
% OOf LS %LY 6e's GF +/9 + cul Sit ON 89 i
MEE EE cL'¢ %H6E BLE f1-/F — cs 98 TS TS WwW
YoLS BE 67'S %8 ore Loa /P tt 601 101 iS or WwW
% O01 68°9 OP oP 8 -/6 + 66 86 GN Os W
,Umqsypemy = 3AIW -WLldD VIN dxg /29y sLAdd = ,UetyNe AHIR (sour ut) X85
plfousey UONRITUNWILOD Wo
sioidiasap SIOIdPOsap pazIpIepueis

adei snynwns

 

 

sasoas aguasipelui pup ‘a8onsuny ‘yoaads ‘xas (yD) asp jor1Bo0jouosy.) /uadpyiyo ajdiups fo uoljdiiasag "| 9eL

dae wae ein gt Ap yt eg aA cate ag woe

“ey
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 454
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

Thirty kindergarten teachers were selected to participate in this study.
They were selected from public schools in a university community of 55,000
people, a smaller community of 7,000 people, and a larger metropolitan
area, Of the kindergarten teachers contacted, 27 (90%) participated in the
study. The teachers ranged in age from 24 to 54 years (M = 38.77, SD =
8.43). Their teaching experience ranged from 1 to 35 years (M = 13.07,
SD = 8.84). Of these teachers, 26 were female. Their educational degrees
ranged from BA/BS to MA/MS or more. :

Female adults of comparable educational backgrounds, although not in
the field of education, were selected to form a comparison group: 15 were
members of a women’s social sorority, and 10 were nurses. The comparison
group was drawn from a small community of about 7,000 people. The
women ranged in age from 31 to 56 years (M = 38.56, SD = 5.95). Their
educational backgrounds ranged from high school diplomas to MA/MS,
degrees, with the majority of women holding BA/BS degrees. Various oc-
cupations were represented in the comparison group, including business
positions and nursing, as well as homemakers and students.

Additionally, data from two larger samples were collected during guest
lectures given by the first author. One group consisted of 175 undergradu-
ate students at a large midwestern university who were enrolled in a devel-
opmental psychology course. The second sample consisted of 56 speech-
language pathologists who were attending a professional state convention.
Although the general educational backgrounds of these subjects can be
inferred, additional demographic information is unavailable. These groups
-heard the Order 1 stimulus tape because preliminary analyses indicated that
this order yielded more conservative effects (less exaggerated differences
between groups).

Rating task

A 9-item form was used to collect the adults’ responses to the audiotaped
speech samples: 7 items elicited judgments of child attributes, such as social
maturity, peer relationships, intelligence, and academic success; 2 items
elicited judgments of parental attributes, including assumed level of educa-
tion and social status. Responses were organized on a 5-point Likert scale
ranging from 1-5 for each item, where 1 was negative and 5 was positive.
See Appendix 2 for the individual items. .

Procedure

A packet of six single-page forms, one for each child’s speech sample, was
distributed to all subjects. Each form was numbered with corresponding
subject codes. The instructions were read verbally to the subjects by an
examiner. It is important to note that the judges were told that the children
were of equivalent ages.
You will hear samples of six children’s voices. These children are preschool-
age and will be beginning kindergarten next year. Each child will count and
ON a ne

=. es a a. a a i. ran LP ee Pe gen

cn

 

Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 455
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

then describe a toy. Please circle the response that most closely matches your

impressions of each child. The anonymity of all responses will be observed.

You will complete one form per child.

The examiner remained in the room to play the stimulus tape and to
ensure that subjects in pairs or groups did not discuss their responses.
Before each sample was played, the examiner stated the subject identifica-
tion number for the current sample. Following each sample, subjects re-
sponded to the nine questions on the form. They were instructed not to
compare their responses to those on any forms previously completed.

RESULTS

We were inferested in how adult raters evaluated both child and parental
attributes of children who varied in communication abilities. Children were
selected for the stimulus tape as a function of their varying communication
skills. It was important to verify that listeners did indeed perceive the com-
munication skills of the children in the manner we intended. Therefore, the
item “How well does this child get his/her message across?” was used as a
validity check on the children selected. A 4 x 3 (Rater Group x Commu-
nication Ability) analysis of variance (ANOVA), with the levels of speaker
communication ability as a repeated measure, revealed significant effects
for communication ability, F(2, 536) = 615.88, p < .001. The adult
judges rated the ND children an average of 3.7 (or “normal for age”), the
S&L children, 1.5 (where | was “not very well”), and SI children, in between
at 2.5 (somewhat below “normal”), thus confirming our continuum of com-
munication difficulties. Significant differences were noted for the between-
group factor, rater group, F(3, 268) = 19.14, p < .001, although this
main effect was of considerably smaller magnitude than the effect for com-
munication ability. These differences contributed to a Rater Group x
Communication Ability interaction effect, F(6, 536) = 4.39, p < .001.
The difference between the ND and the SLI children was greatest for the
control group and least different for the speech-language pathologists. It
was not the case that the speech-language pathologists were more likely to
rate SI and SLI children as less effective. Instead, their ratings for the ND
children were lower than those of the others raters.

Following confirmation that raters exhibited the anticipated perceptions
of differences in the children’s communication abilities, we were interested
in how these differences resulted in judgments of personal attributes and
indirect judgments about the children’s parents. Two composite variables
were computed to reflect child and parental attributes. For the Child Total,
responses for 5 items were summed. These items inquired about the follow-
ing characteristics: intelligence, social maturity, leadership qualities, peer
relationships, and kindergarten success. (For overall responses to individual
items, refer to Table 2.) At each level of communication ability (i.e., ND,
SI, or S&L), a score ranging from 10 to 50 was possible: 2(Children)
x S(Items) x (Rating [1-5]). (The first item, asking about the child’s age,
was not included because age-related information was provided in the in-
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 456
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

Table 2. Mean scores and standard deviations fin parentheses)

 

 

 

Sor individual items
Communication ability
nn
Items ND SI S&L
Message 3.72 2.69 1.54
(71) (.74) (.52)
Smart 3.62 3.30 2.40
(.48) (.44) (.50)
Leadership 3.57 3.09 1.96
(.56) (.58) (.59)
Likable 3.83 3.70 2.84
(.53) (.54) (.55)
Parent education 3.64 3.30 2.42
(.56) (.61) (.67)
Parent social status 3.34 3.07 2.34
(.45) (.45) (.58)
Social maturity 3,53 3.12 2.00
(.55) (.52) (.61)
Academic success 4.22 3.66 2.37
(.60) (.67) (.74)

 

 

Note: ND, normally developing language; SI, speech impaired
only; S&L, speech and language impaired.

structions. Instead, it served as a factual “warm-up” item.) For the Adult
Total, responses for 2 items were summed. These items reflected judgments
about the parents’ educational background and social status. Thus, a score
ranging from 4 to 20 was possible. Reported in Table 3 are the cell means
and standard deviations for the three levels of Communication Ability x
Rater Group for the Child Total and the Adult Total (see also Figures 1
and 2),

Group comparisons ‘

Two univariate two-factor ANOVAs were run, with rater group as a be-
tween factor and communication ability as the repeated factor. The depen-
dent variables were Child Total and Adult Total. For each analysis, any
subject that did not respond to items necessary for the computation of the
composite variables were discarded. Only 6% and 10% of the total subjects
were eliminated from the analyses for Child Total and Adult Total, respec-
tively.

For the Child Total analysis, significant differences between rater groups
were not apparent, F(3, 262) = 2.02, p > -05, indicating that all four
groups rated the speech samples similarly on items pertaining to child attri-
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 457
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

Table 3. Mean scores and standard deviations (in parentheses) for child total and
adult total composite variables

 

 

Communication ability

Rater group n ND SI S&L

 

Child Total

Teachers 24 37.54 33.13 23.29
(4,51) (5.13) (4.71)

Comparison group 24 39.58 32.96 20.04
(3.89) (4.17) (4.90)

Undergraduates 170 37.85 34.15 23.49
(3.85) (3.94) (4.62)

Speech-language pathologists 48 36.08 32.98 23.21

(3.76) (4.62) (4.76)
Adult Total

Teachers , 21 12.81 12.14 8.57
(1.80) (1.91) (2.14)
Comparison group 24 13.50 10.96 6.83
(1.72) (1.55) (2.14)
Undergraduates 166 14.36 13.02 9.68
(1.75) (1.90) (2.26)
Speech-language pathologists 44 13.34 12.96 10.57

(1.51) (1.57) (1.62)

 

 

Note: ND, normally developing language; SI, speech impaired only; S&L, speech
and language impaired.

butes. Significant differences were noted for the repeated variable, commu-
nication ability, F(2, 524) = 661.61, p < .001, and the interaction be-
tween rater group and communication ability, F(6, 524) = 4.68, p < .001.
The comparison group was primarily responsible for the interaction effect,
accounting for the highest rating for the ND children and the lowest ratings
for the SI and S&L children (see Figure 1). At the level of individual items
(see Table 2), the main effects for communication ability held for each
item (p < .001). Rater effects were apparent for two items, maturity and
probability of kindergarten success (p < .001 and .01, respectively). Inter-
action effects were evident for each of the items.

For the Adult Total, main effects for rater group were apparent,
F(3, 251) = 16.59, p < .001, as were main effects for communication abil-
ity, F(2, 502) = 304.95, p < .001, and the interaction between the two
factors, F(6, 502) = 8.56, p < .O01 (see Figure 2). As in the case of the
Child. Total, the interaction seemed attributable to extreme ratings by the
comparison group, whose range separating the ND children from the S&L
children was the largest among the four groups of raters. At the level of
individual items, communication ability effects were evident for both items
(p < .001), as were interaction effects. The rater effect held for parent
education alone (p < .001).
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 458
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

 

 

 

507
©4075 ,
oO
oO
WM
Cc
oO
s 307
& Teachers
12 SLPs
oo 20 a \ Comparison
‘€ Group
O

10 J

ND SI S&L

Communication Ability Group

Figure 1. Adult judgment questionnaire: Group means for Child Total score.

A consideration of the effect sizes for the main effects and interactions
can assist in interpretation. The communication ability main effects for
individual items tanged from .46 to .65, indicating that the group means
for these items were separated by approximately .5 of a standard deviation
or more. According to Stevens (1986), these are medium effect sizes (it is
Tare to get very large effect sizes in the social sciences). On the other hand,
the effect sizes for the interaction effects were far more modest, ranging
from .03 to .09. In other words, the interaction effects, although signifi-
cant, are separated by .09 of a standard deviation or less. Neither were the
effect sizes for the rater group main effects very compelling. For the items
entering into the Child Total composite score, only the items relating to
social maturity and kindergarten success yielded rater group differences:
the effect sizes for these items are .08 and .05, respectively. The effect
sizes for the two parental attributes were somewhat larger: .17 for parental
education and .11 for SES. Sull, however, these effects remained small,
particularly in relation to the considerably stronger effect sizes revealed by
the communication ability factor. Thus, the overwhelming effect is that
adults associate levels of children’s communicative competence with levels

en

~
cee PL,

 

Oo

Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 45
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

   

 

207
5 167
O
on WN
G “——S
® 127
2 YON SLPs
S . » Undergraduates
Oo ‘\
- \ Teachers
a 8 N Comparison
To Group
<<

4 wal
ND Sl S&L

Communication Ability Group

Figure 2. Adult judgment questionnaire: Group means for Adult Total score.

of their intelligence, leadership skill, popularity, social maturity, and prob-
ability of academic success, and, furthermore, with levels of parental in-
come and education. This is all the more impressive given the brief duration
(about 90 seconds) of the speech samples. The extent to which these judg-
ments are modulated by the professional backgrounds and educational lev-
els of the judges sampled is relatively minor.

Factors influencing rater judgments

In order to determine what factors influenced the judgments of the adult
rater groups, each child’s 1Q score, as well as the two measures computed
from the speech sample (i.e, MLU and percentage of complete and intelli-
gible utterances), were correlated with the Child Total for each child. It
should be noted that only six data points were available, and therefore the
correlations should be interpreted very cautiously. Nevertheless, Child To-
tal appeared more strongly related to the measure of intelligibility (r =
.86, p < .05) than to either 1Q or MLU (see Table 4), although the other
two associations were positive and quite high.
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 460
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

Table 4. Correlations between child descriptors and Child Total score

 

 

Child descriptors

 

 

 

 

Rater group Kaufman MLU Intelligibility
Teachers 70 78 .87*
Comparison group .63 82 .90*
Undergraduates .76 78 .85*
Speech-language pathologists 69 17 .83*
All subjects 73 77 .86*
*p < 05.

DISCUSSION

It is clearly the case that adult judges do regard some children as better
able to “get their message across” than others. Although the judges were
not informed of the children’s clinical status, their judgments corroborated
the children’s a priori clinical classifications, a finding that was true for the
untrained as well as the trained judges. Thus, there is some social validity
to the notion of “impaired” communicative ability for the children sampled.

What is interesting is how adults arrived at this detection of individual
differences. There must be some sense of age-referenced speech and lan-
guage competencies — some template of expected skills - that is applied to
individual variations. The adult judges (even those without technical train-
ing) were able to identify the ND children as those whose speech and lJan-
guage was “normal for their age” and the clinically defined children as
below that level. This is all the more impressive because in these samples,
as real instances of 4'4- to 5-year-old speech, the ND children’s speech was
not adultlike: that is, the children were not completely intelligible and did
not speak with the clear enunciation of adults, nor with fully fluent gram-
matical utterances. Grammatical errors were present, such as the normal
male’s utterance, “now all the horses get out because he’s to the farm”;
false starts, repetitions, and unfinished utterances were evident in the nor-
mal female’s sample. Thus, the distinction is not as simple as those of “fully
correct, conventional language” versus “errorful language,” but instead is
operative on some relative scale. ‘

Given the considerable variability in language skills across children, and
of different ages, it is somewhat remarkable that such a judgment should
be operative for late preschoolers. Presumably, in their informal, daily
interactions with children of various ages, adults are able to accumulate a
general sense of what constitutes “child talk.” It would be very interesting
to learn the basis of the adult’s judgments, the kinds of cues they rely on
in children’s talk, to determine age-referenced competencies. Because the
samples used in this study varied on multiple dimensions, they are not well
suited for identifying the contribution of individual features, although the
correlations imply that phonological competency (intelligibility) plays a
set

pe eaten’ BS

PA peice

Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 461
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

substantial role, as probably does MLU. These two features were also im-
plicated in the Burroughs and Tomblin (1990) study; their measure of aver-
age number of words per turn is roughly equivalent to the MLU measure
used here.

If adults can differentiate between young children on the basis of how
well they talk and project attributes to the speaker on the basis of this
perceived difference, this suggests that some of the bias demonstrated to-
ward children speaking nonstandard English may, in part, be due to judg-
ments about language accuracy as well as language difference associated
with ethnic or minority group affiliation. In other words, the risk may be
for any perceived differences from the expected patterns. In this sense,
then, there may be a “different child dialect” for children that carries with
it sociopsychological consequences similar to those observed for dialect
speakers.

Correlative causal model of language impairment

It is how the adults interpret the “different child dialect” that is of the most
interest. In this case, there are no social stereotypes about aggregates of
people, such as ethnic subgroups, to call upon. Instead, the judges inferred
some individual differences on the part of the children: they assume that,
as compared to children with normative speech and language acquisition,
children with limited skills are less bright, less likely to be classroom lead-
ers, less likable, less socially mature, and less likely to succeed in kindergar-
ten. Furthermore, the judges ascribed limitations to these children’s par-
ents: the average SES level for the parent ratings of S&L children was blue
collar/middle class, whereas for the ND and SI children it was middle/
upper middle class; the average educational level for the S&L children’s
parent ratings was high school, whereas some college or college training
was attributed to the parents of ND and SI children.

In the absence of an explanation of the linguistic differences based on.
social group membership, another explanation must apply. One possibility
is that in their interactions with children, adults formed a correlative causal
model of language limitation, which they then used to interpret differences
from the normative template. Following Hamilton’s (1981) correlational
model of stereotyping, we suppose that adults, in their interactions with and °
observations of children, noted the co-occurrence of children’s linguistic
competencies and other variables, such as child attributes (e.g., intelligence,
social maturity, and academic aptitude) and child background (¢.g., paren-
tal education and social class). Furthermore, we suppose that the noted
associations would be biased in a way that confirms the adults’ expecta-
tions. Thus, the expected associations would be remembered better than .
the unexpected ones.

This can be illustrated using a contingency table (see Figure 3). For the
predictor variable x, we can assume one or a combination of the attributes
rated on the questionnaire, such as social maturity, intelligence, or parental
educational level. The actual expected frequency for each of the cells is not
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 462
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

Predictor Variable X

 

 

Good Limited
>
o
§
Q 8

o
E
°o
oO
2
%
3
a
&
3a
nA am
> (E
= —
oO

 

 

 

 

Figure 3. Contingency table of information relevant to assessing the relationship be-
tween children’s linguistic competency and other predictors.

known, although the generally high positive correlations of intelligence with
verbal language skills and of parental education and SES with vocabulary
development lead us to expect that the highest frequency will be in the
good-good cell (i.e., children with high verbal abilities tend to have good
intellectual and social skills and come from “good” home situations). Thus,
it could be concluded that these predictor variables “cause” the good lan-
guage abilities. This correlative causal model would receive further confir-
mation by the existence of children in the diagonal cell (.e., those of limited
language and limited variable x). For example, children with low intellec-
tual functioning tend to have low verbal skills. What happens to the chil-
dren who fail into the off cells? Our expectation is that both groups of
these children will be vulnerable to misinterpretation. On the one hand,
children with good language skills but limited variable x may benefit from
the predictions of the correlative causal model and be regarded‘as function-
ing somewhat higher on variable x than may be the actual case. On the
other hand, children with limited language skills may be misjudged and
viewed as having less of variable x than is the case.

Thus, some distributional realities may strengthen a correlative causal
model; however, the model would erroneously predict some associations.
For example, although speech accuracy influenced judgments of intelli-
gence in this study and in Burroughs and Tomblin (1990), in the nonre-
tarded population (as in the samples here), phonological proficiency is not
strongly associated with intelligence (Winitz, 1969). Furthermore, complex
interactions among the variables may contribute to the improbability of
ce ae

ent ME ee

:
i
i

‘
|

 

re

Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 463
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

disconfirming the model. If, for example, youngsters with limited language
skills are aware of these limitations and begin to make some adjustments in
their interactive styles, they can begin to appear as if they are socially inept,
in much the same way that adults can seem to be somewhat unresponsive
when they do not know the language of their interactants. Thus, these
children can be misinterpreted as confirming instances of the model; they
are also likely to go unrecognized as disconfirming cases of the model.
There simply is not available an alternative mechanism as salient as lan-
guage for the expression of social and intellectual insights. Thus, in order to
recognize these resources in language-impaired individuals, more extensive
contact is required or more subtle observations. Finally, to the extent that
this model is widespread, that it brings a negative assessment of the cause
of a child’s, language limitations, and that it is assumed on the part of
parents and families, there may be a sense of embarrassment about a child’s
language limitations. If so, there may be a reluctance to acknowledge a
child’s speech and language impairments, adding further to the invisibility
of the disconfirming cases.

Thus, an oversimplified view of the origins of individual variability in
language acquisition — a correlative causal model - could lead to the nega-
tive social judgments revealed in the findings of this study. While the tech-
nical details of the causal factors, and their interactions, remain to be
worked out, they will surely be more complex than this model implies.
What this model does suggest is how such biases could develop, operate,
and continue. At the same time, such biases have obvious and powerful
consequences for children’s academic and social development.

A correlative model could also apply to children with dialects or limited
nonnative language competency. It is consistent with the report that multi-
lingual children are often classified as having low intelligence or learning
disorders (Cummins, 1984). The implication is that any kind of nonstan-
dard dialect or language may invoke this causal model to account for the
difference. In the case of ethnic differences, an additional filter of cultural
stereotypes could be overlaid on this model to flesh out the set of attributes
associated with a conventional dialect.

Further questions .

An obvious question is why the educators and speech-language pathologists
did not differ more from the nonspecialists in their attribution of personal
characteristics to speech and language impaired children. Indeed, there
were some hints that these raters responded differently from the other
groups. Some individuals in these groups did indicate reluctance to respond
to the parent items, saying in effect that they “weren’t supposed to make
these kind of judgments.” When encouraged to respond anyway, their blind
evaluations of the children did demonstrate a bias, although the speech-
language pathologists had a somewhat more restricted range of judgments
than the other groups. On the other hand, some members of the compari-
son group, who indicated the most extreme judgments, actually laughed
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 464
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

when the SI and S&L children’s samples were played, as if the samples were
jokes or parodies of expected abilities.

It is not known whether the professionals, especially the speech-language
pathologists, may have surmised the clinical status of some of the samples.
If they did so (and it seems likely that this happened at least occasionally),
they would have had to guess at an etiology as well. Mental retardation
would be a plausible etiology, in addition to SLI, that could not be ruled
out without professional assessment. Our interpretation is that profession-
als are also likely to default to an account consistent with the conventional
correlative causal model when other information is not available to override
it (information they are trained to obtain in formal assessment circum-
stances). It would be interesting to examine the influence of diagnostic
category on listener judgments to see if professionals modulate their biases
when told that the children are SLI, while lay persons exaggerate their /
biases.

This study was not designed to identify the linguistic features associated
with the “different child dialect,” nor the question of which features are
linked to the personal attributes. Bradac (1990) reviewed interesting ways
in which factors such as lexical diversity and speaking rate interact with
listener judgments of dialect speakers. Future investigations of child speak-
ers could profit from the observation that intelligibility of the children’s
speech seem to play a substantial role, as well as other general descriptors
such as mean length of utterance and general intellectual level. Discourse
(dis)abilities are not well represented in such small samples, of course,
although it is plausible that they contribute to listeners’ judgments of
speaker aptitudes. Some time ago, Williams (1973b) identified a dimension
of “confidence-eagerness” by which teachers differentiated children’s
speech and linked those differentiations to ethnic/social class stereotypes.
This dimension was thought to “reflect the degree to which the child speaks
continuously and fluently, carries the ‘conversational ball,’ and reflects en-
thusiasm” (p. 116). That dimension has strong parallels to the discourse/
social interactive limitations observed for SLI children, which are also
linked to social status among ND children (Black & Hazen, 1990; Hazen &
Black, 1989).

Social consequences account of SLI 4

The findings support the notion that SLI children suffer social conse-
quences of their language limitations, in much the same way that dialect or
nonnative speakers do (Rice, 1992). To the extent that adults and peers are
likely to interpret limited speech and language competencies as an indica-
tion of limited child capacity or home setting, a child’s opportunities to
engage in discourse are likely to be curtailed, his or her confidence in
communicative success will be reduced, and both factors will contribute
further to a marginal interactive status.

Furthermore, the possible academic consequences are obvious. If deci-
sions to advance kindergartners to first grade, for example, depend on
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 465
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

estimates of children’s social maturity, and if these estimates are biased by
the children’s verbal capacities, then children with limited verbal skill may
not be promoted. The tragedy is that confusing language limitations with
social or personal attributes not only perpetuates a self-fulfilling prophecy
of academic risk, but also does little to enhance confidence in the communi-
cative interactive skills that are valued in classrooms.

APPENDIX 1

Each unintelligible word is denoted by an X. Completely unintelligible ut-
terances are denoted with XXX. Words set off by parentheses (and count-
ing) were not included in the calculation of mean length of utterance. It is
also important to point out that the language samples provided here were
transcribed by a familiar adult using high fidelity stereo equipment. The
descriptors for each sample provided in Table 1 were computed based on
the intelligible speech heard in a quiet room, conditions similar to those
experienced by the subjects.

Child, Examiner.

Classification = Male, normally developing speech and language (ND).
Age at sample = 50 months.

Let’s count and see what number it is.
All the way to here, okay?

1.

(2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 14).
14,

Tell me about your toys.

They’re not my toys.

Okay well tell me about them anyway.
You hook this in here.

Mmhm.

It’s hard to hook.

It is?

Then what?

It’s hooked.

Uhhuh.

You put the horses in here.

Oh, I see.

The black ones get to be in the front.

I see, then what?

The brown ones get to be in the back.
Oh.

Then (what) what does it do?

It rolls.

Oh.

Now all the horses get out because he’s to the farm.

amammMamamamoammoamamammammnm
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 466
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

Child, Examiner.

Classification = Male, speech impaired only (SI).

Age at sample = 46 months.

AMaAaOMANMaAaMaAMomMAmMan

Let’s see what number it is, okay?

So help me count all the way to here.

1.

(2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 17, 16, X, um, 20).
20

(22, 23, 24, 25).

And what’s this one, what’s one more?
(26).

Did you bring something for sharing today?
No.

But I bring in the money out of my X.
Well, tell me about that.

(Um) I got itX X X Xx.

X out my X and I got it out KX XX.
Ubhuh.

AndIX X,

XXX.

(Oh) that’s lots and lots of it.

Yeah.

Child, Examiner. .
Classification = Male, speech and language impaired (S&L).
Age at sample = 51 months.

QMOAMIAMAONMAMMOAMOMAmm

Okay let’s try counting, okay?
<1,2>.

<(1, 2)>.

Sit up.

Okay.

3.

(3).

(4, 9, 10, 11).

What’s next?

12.

(Hey) why you live here?

Tell me about your toys.

I brought it for my.

And my own.

Mhm, what else?

I got some whole bunch of toys.
And I got whole bunch not for sharing.
What’s this?

I’m taking my ball (and 1) and I don’t bring it.
Tina, my ball.

Why are the boys way up there?

™

ae.
an er emer Ne ene

Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 467
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

AaAmMaAaAaAM

Uhhuh.

XXX.

And I had to fall down.
XXX.

Ubhuh.

XXX.

XXX.

Child, Examiner.
Classification = Female, normally developing speech and language (ND).
Age at sample = 68 months.

aAmmaancam aamammamna

(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20).
Good, OK.

(20).

Now, did you bring something to show me?

Tell me about your toys.

(Um well) you can paint their nails.

Mhm.

(And) you can put them in (my) my play pony bag (and you can um).
(And) they’ll stand up (so, so you can) so you can (um) pretend (you’re)
something’s riding the horse.

Oh neat.

(And) you can (um, un) pretend like >

(And) you can put it in the bathtub (and) and put real water in it.
(and) wash it.

Really, wow.

Anything else?

(And) you can (put buh) braid its hair and put barrettes init.

Child, Examiner.
Classification = Female, speech impaired only (SD.
Age at sample = 65 months.

qm

aamamanaqgnmam

Let’s see what number it is, one.

(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27).

Did you bring something for sharing?

Yes.

Tell me about these.

My mama bought them.

For my school here.

(And we take) the other kids can play with them cause I won't be here.
(cause) I'll be in kindergarten.

Mhm.

It’s gonna be so fun at kindergarten.

Can you tell me something about this?

Okay.

My little brother Mark has this.
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

Cc
Cc
E
Cc

X X my mama X.
XXX,

Okay.
Knockknock.

Child, Examiner.
Classification = Female, speech and language impaired (S&L).
Age at sample = 65 months.

MAQAMAMAMARAAMNAAMOAmMmmmMOAm

Now let’s count and see what number it is.
Okay.
1, 2.

468

Ci, 2,3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 27, 29).

Okay, thanks.

Can you tell me about your toy?
Mhm.

In to here.

Yep.

like to X at her.

Ubhuh.

I like (um) X.

XXX,

XXX.

IT like them both.

Uhhuh.

And I] like X X.

What else?

Nothing.

What do you do with her?
X at her.

X at her.

Uhhuh, OK.

APPENDIX 2
CHILD SPEAKER RATING SCALE

Child Number ___

1.

 

How old did you think this child sounded?
1 2 3 4
3 yrs. 4 yrs. 5 yrs. 6 yrs.
How well does this child get his/her message across?
1 2 3 4
not very normal
well for age
How smart is this child?
1 2 3 4
well below below average above
average average average

7 yrs.

very
well

5
well above
average
ee ne a

Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 469
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

4. Would this child be a classroom leader?

1 2 3 4 5

definitely maybe definitely
not
5. Would other children like this child?

1 2 3 4 5

definitely maybe definitely
not
6. How well educated are this child’s parents?

1 2 3 4 5

less than high some completed advanced
high school school college 4-yr. degree degree
7. What is the social status of this child’s family?

1 2 3 4 5
welfare/ blue middie upper- upper
indigent collar class middle class class

8. Does this child seem socially mature?

1 2 3 4 5

not very normal very
mature for age mature
9. Would this child academically succeed in a kindergarten classroom?

1 2 3 4 5

definitely maybe definitely
not
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The study reported here was supported by the Kansas Early Childhood Research
Institute (HCEEP Grant No. H024U280001) and DE Training Grant No.
H029D90046-90. Parts of this report are based on a thesis completed by the third
author in partial fulfillment of the requirements for a Master’s degree in speech-
language pathology. Thanks are given to the kindergarten teachers, nurses, women’
sorority members, undergraduate students, and speech-language professionals who
completed the ratings. Special appreciation is expressed to Martha Crago and Don
Taylor for their helpful suggestions on earlier versions of this article.

REFERENCES

Black, B., & Hazen, N. L. (1990). Social status and patterns of communication in acquainted
and unacquainted preschool children. Developmental Psychology, 26, 379-387.

Boyer, E. L. (1991). Ready to learn: A mandate for the nation. Princeton, NJ: Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.

Bradac, J. J. (1990). Language attitudes and impression formation. In H. Giles & W. P.
Robinson (Eds.), Handbook of language and social psychology (pp. 387-412). West .
Sussex: Wiley.

Burroughs, E. I., & Tomblin, J. B. (1990). Speech and language correlates of adults’ judg-
ments of children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 55, 485-494.

Catts, H. W. (1990). Promoting successful transition to the primary grades: Prediction of
reading problems in speech and language handicapped children. Unpublished manu-
script.
Applied Psycholinguistics 14:4 470
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

Cummins, J. (1984). Bilingualism and special education: Issues in assessment and pedagogy.
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.

Curtiss, S., Katz, W., & Tallal, P. (1992). Delay vs. deviance in the language acquisition of
language impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 35, 373-383.

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised. Circle Pines,
MN: American Guidance Service.

Giles, H., & Coupland, N. (1991). Language: Contexts and consequences. Pacific Grove, CA:
Brookes/Cole.

Goldman, R., & Fristoe, M. (1986). The Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation. Circle Pines,
MN: American Guidance Service.

Grosjean, F. (1982). Life with two languages: An introduction to bilingualism. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Hains, A. H., Fowler, S. A., Schwartz, I. S., Kottwitz, E., & Rosenkoetter, 5. (1990). A
comparison of preschool and kindergarten teacher expectations for school readiness.
Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 4, 75-88.

Hakuta, K. (1986). The mirror of language: The debate on bilingualism. New York: Basic
Books.

Hamilton, D. L. (1981). Hlusory correlation as a basis for stereotyping. In D. L. Hamilton
(Ed.), Cognitive processes in stereotyping and intergroup behavior (pp. 115-144). Hills-
dale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Hazen, N. L., & Black, B. (1989). Preschool peer communication skills: The role of social
status and interaction context. Child Development, 60, 867-876.

Heath, 5. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities and class-
rooms, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hirshler, J. A. (1991). Preschool children’s help to second language learners. Unpublished
doctoral thesis, Harvard University Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA.

Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L. (1983). Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children. Circle
Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.

Lahey, M., Liebergott, J., Chesnick, M., Menyuk, P., & Adams, J. (1992). Variability in the
use of grammatical morphemes: Implications for understanding language impairment.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 13, 373-398.

Lambert, W., Hodgson, R., Gardner, R., & Fillenbaum, S. (1960). Evaluational reactions to
spoken languages. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 60, 44-81.

Leonard, L. B. (1989). Language learnability and specific language impairment in children.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 10, 179-202.

McLaughlin, B. (1978). Second language acquisition in childhood. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Miller, J. (1981). Assessing language production in children. Baltimore, MD: University Park
Press.

Miller, J.. & Chapman, R. (1990). Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts (SALT)
{computer program]. Madison: University of Wisconsin.

Peterson, S. E., DeGracie, J. S., & Ayabe, C. R. (1987). A longitudinal study of the effects
of retention/promotion on academic achievement. American Educational Research
Journal, 24, 107-118.

Reck, U. M., Reck, G. G., & Keefe, S. (1987, April). Teacher’s perceptions of Appalachian
and non-Appalachian students. Washington, DC: American Educational Research As-
sociation.

Reynell, J. K. (1985). Reynell Developmental Language Scales-Revised. Windsor: Nfer-
Nelson Publishing Company.

Rice, M. L. (£991). Children with specific language impairment: Toward a model of teachabil-
ity. In N. A. Krasnegor, D. M. Rumbaugh, R. L. Schiefelbusch, & M. Studdert-
Kennedy (Eds.), Biological and behavioral determinants of language development (pp.
447-480). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

(1992). “Don’t talk to him; He’s weird”: A social consequences account of language and
social interactions. In A. Kaiser & D. Gray (Eds.), Enhancing children’s communica-
tion: Research foundations for intervention (pp. 139-158). Baltimore, MD: Brookes.

Rice, M. L., & Oetting, J. B. (1991, October}. Morphological deficits of specific language
se at

AR ee get a

ar

ar

Ae a

<n.

Applied Psycholinguistics [4:4 471
Rice et al.: Social biases toward children

impairment: A matter of missing functional categories? Paper presented at the Boston
University Conference on Language Development, Boston, MA.

Rice, M. L., Sell, M. A., & Hadley, P. A. (1991). Social interactions of speech and language
impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 34, 1299-1307.

Seligman, C. R., Tucker, G. R., & Lambert, W. E. (1972). The effects of speech style and
other attributes on teachers’ attitudes toward pupils. Language in Society, 1, 131-142.

Shuy, R., & Fasold, R. (1973). Language attitudes: Current trends and prospects. Washington,
DC: Georgetown University Press.

Stevens, J. (1986). Applied multivariate statistics for the social sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erl-
baum.

Tabors, P. O. (1987). The developmen: of communicative competence by second language
learners in a nursery school classroom: An ethnolinguistic study. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Taylor, O. (1973). Teachers’ attitude toward Black and non-standard English as measured by
the language attitude scale. In R. Shuy & R. Fasold (Eds.), Language attitudes: Current
trends and prospects (pp. 174-201). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.

Terrell, S. L’, & Terrell, F. (1983). Effects of speaking Black English upon employment
opportunities. ASHA, 25(6), 27-29.

Walsh, D. J. (1989). Changes in kindergarten: Why here? Why now? Early Childhood Re-
search Quarterly, 4, 377-391. :

Williams, F. (1973a). Some recent studies in language attitudes. In R. Shuy (Ed.), Some new
directions in linguistics (pp. 121-149). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.

(1973b). Some research notes on dialect attitudes and stereotypes. In R. W. Shuy &
R. W. Fasold (Eds.), Language attitudes: Current trends and prospects (pp. 113-128).
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.

Winitz, H, (1969). Articulating acquisition and behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-

Crofts.
