This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2004, Vol. 87, No. 6, 817-831

Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/04/$12.00 DOT: 10.1037/0022-3514.87.6.817

Casuistry and Social Category Bias

Michael I. Norton
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Joseph A. Vandello
University of South Florida

John M. Darley

Princeton University

This research explored cases where people are drawn to make judgments between individuals based on
questionable criteria, in particular those individuals’ social group memberships. We suggest that indi-
viduals engage in casuistry to mask biased decision making, by recruiting more acceptable criteria to
justify such decisions. We present 6 studies that demonstrate how casuistry licenses people to judge on
the basis of social category information but appear unbiased—to both others and themselves—while
doing so. In 2 domains (employment and college admissions decisions), with 2 social categories (gender
and race), and with 2 motivations (favoring an in-group or out-group), the present studies explored how
participants justify decisions biased by social category information by arbitrarily inflating the relative
value of their preferred candidates’ qualifications over those of competitors.

A male bank president is faced with hiring a new vice president
in this traditionally male-dominated profession. Two finalists
emerge: a woman with a great deal of experience but mediocre
recommendations and a man with little experience but strong
recommendations. The choice is a difficult one, as both dimen-
sions are clearly relevant and important, and each candidate is
stronger on one dimension. The decision is made more difficult by
the fact that the candidates differ in gender, because either choice
may invite suspicion of bias. If the president selects the male
candidate, he may be accused of sexism, but if he chooses the
female candidate he may be suspected of bowing to norms of
political correctness. Thus the bank president can be accused of
bias regardless of which candidate he selects.

We suggest that a common strategy used to avoid the appear-
ance of bias when making such decisions is to cloak decision
making in more acceptable terms. The president might select the
male candidate, for example, but claim that his decision was
motivated by the candidate’s superior qualifications by stressing
his belief that recommendations are more important than experi-

 

Michael I. Norton, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology; Joseph A. Vandello, Department of Psychology, Uni-
versity of South Florida; John M. Darley, Department of Psychology,
Princeton University.

These studies were conducted as part of Michael I. Norton’s doctoral
dissertation at Princeton University. Michael I. Norton thanks the members
of his dissertation committee: Jon Cohen, Joel Cooper, Susan Fiske, Danny
Kahneman, and Debbie Prentice. We thank Penny Visser for her helpful
suggestions in the early stages of this research, Benoit Monin and Leif
Nelson for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this article, and
Sarah Molouki for her assistance with data collection.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Michael
L Norton, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology, 20 Ames Street, E15-319, Cambridge, MA 02139. E-mail:
minorton @media.mit.edu

817

ence. On the other hand, our bank president may feel that it is
appropriate to give the edge to the woman to make up for tradi-
tional underrepresentation. Despite this very different motivation,
our president might still be motivated to hide the true reasons for
his preference, because an admission that the decision was moti-
vated by gender might cause others to criticize him for paying lip
service to political correctness, or may undermine the woman’s
credibility in the eyes of other employees. This president, then,
might select the woman but claim that the decision was based on
his strong belief that experience is important
qualification.

By recruiting attributes that support a preferred decision through
reshaping the importance of qualifications— or, more generally, by
reshaping attributes of the social world—individuals are able to
mask potentially biased decision making. In the present research
we explored this general phenomenon in more depth: By engaging
in casuistry—specious reasoning in the service of justifying ques-
tionable behavior—when confronted with difficult choices, people
are better able to make these difficult decisions. In general use,
casuistry has the connotation of public pronouncements intended
to mislead others. This first sense of casuistry is intended to bolster
one’s public image, but the second purpose of casuistry—individ-
uals’ private rationalization of their questionable behavior—is
equally important. Our bank president may be faced with both
extemal (e.g., laws prohibiting discrimination of the basis of
gender, or political correctness norms) and internal pressures (e.g.,
his egalitarian beliefs or internalized norms of political correct-
ness) to make the correct choice. Casuistry may serve both to
justify questionable decisions to others and to rationalize such
decisions to oneself, allowing one to maintain what Pyszczynski
and Greenberg (1987) called a desired “illusion of objectivity”.

Our present focus is on decision making in social domains,
where categories such as sex or race are morally charged and raise
questions of prejudice and bias, which likely increases individuals’

the more
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

818 NORTON, VANDELLO, AND DARLEY

motivation to mask questionable behavior.' Social scientists have
long been interested in exploring cases where the human desire to
appear moral fails to result in moral behavior, of course. Psychol-
ogists frequently focus on situations in which people attempt to
justify or rationalize questionable or immoral behavior (e.g., Ban-
dura, 1999; Tsang, 2002), and the many ways in which question-
able decisions, policies, or actions are justified and legitimized are
well documented (e.g., Kelman, 2001; Scott & Lyman, 1968), as
with those who engage in self-interested behavior with costs to
others (e.g., Batson, Thompson, & Chen, 2002; Monin & Norton,
2003). Batson and his colleagues’ research on moral hypocrisy is
particularly interesting and relevant: In these paradigms, partici-
pants engage in a coin flip, ostensibly to make a fair choice about
whether they or another participant will receive a more attractive
experimental task. A coin flip is generally used as a public sign of
fairness— but participants in these studies flip the coin in private,
and after rigging the flip in their favor continue to see themselves
as unbiased. Below, we explore in more detail private mechanisms
for maintaining a view of the self as unbiased—a goal as funda-
mental as ensuring that others do the same.

Dissonance and Motivated Reasoning in Social
Decision Making

The fact that people are motivated perceivers of the social world
is axiomatic in psychology. A large body of research, dating back
at least as far as S. Freud’s (1894/1962) elaboration of defense
mechanisms (see also A. Freud, 1936), suggests that people’s
perceptions of the world—and of themselves—are often shaded
toward maintaining positive views of the self. Within social psy-
chology, Festinger’s (1957) theory of cognitive dissonance sug-
gests that the need for consistency causes individuals to rationalize
their inconsistent behavior; indeed, several theories of dissonance
suggest it is precisely the need to maintain a positive view of the
self that leads to efforts to reduce dissonance (e.g., Aronson, 1968;
Cooper & Fazio, 1984; C. M. Steele, 1988). Decisions can be
particularly problematic in the social realm, as poor decisions can
both threaten this positive view of the self and threaten one’s
image in the eyes of others. Individuals facing decisions between
two attractive alternatives—as in our opening example of the bank
president—may experience what Festinger (1964) termed antici-
pated dissonance: situations in which individuals are aware that
any decision will lead to inevitable postdecisional regret. Although
social category information (e.g., race or gender) provides a clear
differentiating factor that should simplify such decision making
(Tversky, 1972), individuals in these situations are often pro-
scribed from using such information and must search for different
justification. Indeed, people frequently search for reasons to ratio-
nalize their decisions only after making those decisions (Shafir,
Simonson, & Tversky, 1993), often inflating the value of their
choices as one strategy (Brehm, 1956; Mather, Shafir, & Johnson,
2000). This process is particularly interesting in the situations
under investigation in the present studies because the actual reason
for participants’ choices—social category information—is not
available for purposes of justification, leaving participants to
scramble for other compensatory cognitions. In this view, casuistry
occurs because of this scramble: Forced to make a decision be-
tween members of different social groups, participants quickly
search for other cognitions consonant with their eventual choice
and, having found them, reify them to the status of dominant

criteria to rationalize their decisions—a process that can occur
before or after the decision is made.

The demonstration of the need for cognitive consistency led to
a larger effort to demonstrate and define mechanisms by which
individuals’ motives influence their perceptions of both them-
selves and the social worlds. Research on motivated reasoning
(e.g., Kunda, 1990; Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987) has primarily
explored two sometimes-competing motives in human reasoning,
both of which affect thought and behavior: (a) the motivation to be
accurate (e.g., Kruglanski, 1989b; Pelham, 1991; Pelham & Neter,
1995) and (b) an equally compelling motivation to see things in a
preferred manner (see Kruglanski, 1989a, for an overview). Re-
search exploring this second motivation has generally focused on
two human predilections: (a) the tendency to interpret information
in ways that confirm preexisting beliefs and attitudes about the self
(e.g., Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Lord, Ross, & Lepper, 1979; Swann,
Stein-Seroussi, & Giesler, 1992) and others (e.g., Darley & Gross,
1983; Schaller, 1992) and (b) the robust tendency to view the self
positively— often more positively than is warranted (e.g., Brown
& Rogers, 1991; Dunning, Leuenberger, & Sherman, 1995; Epley
& Dunning, 2000; Goethals, 1986; Pyszczynski & Greenberg,
1987). This tendency to view the self positively can be supported
by the tendency to interpret the world in preferred ways, as
individuals specifically interpret information from the social world
in ways that serve their need for high self-regard. We suggest that
this kind of reasoning is common when individuals face problem-
atic decisions.

In the present studies, we explored reasoning in decisions that
force a person to choose between individuals with different social
category memberships. In particular, decisions that require people
to choose across social categories, such as race or gender, make
two motivations salient: On the one hand, people generally try hard
to be objective, impartial, and unbiased; on the other hand, people
can be motivated to arrive at a desired outcome, such as when
self-interest leads people to see in-group members as more attrac-
tive choices or when egalitarian motives lead people to favor
members of stigmatized or underrepresented groups. Either of the
last two motivations conflict with the motive to be unbiased, which
would require turning a blind eye to social category information.
We suggest that it is these conflicting motivations that lead to
reasoning strategies that attempt to justify decisions in more so-
cially acceptable terms, thus honoring the need to maintain a view
of the self as objective by restructuring the social world in ways
that make the self seem unbiased. In addition, and implicit in the
above discussion, although most of the dissonance and motivated
reasoning involves judgments about the self, the common situa-
tions explored in the present investigation demonstrate how pro-
cesses of motivated reasoning and dissonance reduction are
brought to bear on reasoning about other individuals. Although the
broad motive is the same, to arrive at desired conclusions and to

‘Tt is not the case, of course, that all use of social category information
is proscribed. Members of stigmatized groups may feel more licensed to
use social category information in decision making: The National Associ-
ation for the Advancement of Colored People, for example, is licensed to
use racial information in selecting its leaders. Social category use is
normally proscribed, however, for members of traditionally nonstigmatized
groups, such as, in the United States, Whites, and particularly White men,
the two groups we target in this investigation.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CASUISTRY 819

maintain an illusion of objectivity, in these situations individuals
reshape not aspects of themselves but rather their weighting of the
importance of aspects of others.

Social Categories in Decision Making

Social categories such as race and gender are highly salient, and
although individuals may be reluctant to use this information,
countless investigations have shown that social categories do fac-
tor heavily in social judgment. They can have an automatic influ-
ence on our judgments and decisions (e.g., Allport, 1954; Devine,
1989; Fiske & Neuberg, 1990), and recent research suggests that
race and gender are automatically attended to and encoded almost
instantly (Ito & Urland, 2003), suggesting that their influence on
decision making may be hard to avoid. At the same time, research
has shown that people feel at least somewhat constrained from
judging others on the basis of their social group memberships,
particularly in the absence of other information (Yzerbyt, Schad-
ron, Leyens, & Rocher, 1994). However, although people feel that
having only social category information does not permit judgment
of targets, they will ironically rely on social category information
when given extra information (e.g., Darley & Gross, 1983), even
if they merely believe they have been given such information
(Yzerbyt et al., 1994).

Despite this widely documented influence of social category
information on judgment, this information is among the most
forbidden in both discourse and decision making in contemporary
America. Use of these categories has been officially proscribed in
a variety of contexts, and statements to this effect can be found, for
example, in Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act and the mission
statements of most corporations and universities. Although lan-
guage that suggests freedom from bias does not always reflect an
actual lack of bias, people are at least often motivated to appear
unbiased. White Americans, for example, can be motivated to
appear nonprejudiced toward Blacks (e.g., Plant & Devine, 1998)
and even to avoid acknowledging the possibility that they may
have negative attitudes toward Blacks (Gaertner & Dovidio, 1986).
Because norms in favor of appearing nonprejudiced are strong (at
least in the United States), people’s desire to appear nonprejudiced
frequently leads to actions to ensure that others will view them
accordingly. In a clever study, Dutton (1971) showed that inap-
propriately dressed couples who attempted to dine at restaurants
requiring formal dress were twice as likely to be seated if they
were Black rather than White, presumably because the proprietors
felt that confronting Black patrons might make them appear prej-
udiced. In addition to this desire to appear unbiased to others,
people are also motivated to view themselves as unbiased. When
people realize they have acted in a biased manner, they often
attempt to correct for that bias (Wegener & Petty, 1995; Wilson,
Lindsey, & Schooler, 2000); liberal Whites who learn that deci-
sions they have made may unfairly target Blacks, for example, are
likely to attempt to revise those decisions (Tetlock, Kristel, Elson,
Green, & Lerner, 2000). In sum, then, both internal and external
pressures combine to make use of social category information
taboo in decision making.

The Licensing of Bias

Whereas there is a vast literature on the impact of stereotypes on
judgment, comparatively little research has explicitly examined

how social categories influence choice behavior, when individuals
discriminate—in both senses of the word—between members of
different social groups (Fiske, 1998, but see Dovidio & Gaertner,
2000, and Hodson, Dovidio, & Gaertner, 2002, for notable excep-
tions). This is a potentially important distinction, because choices
are more often public, and decision makers are accountable for
their public preferences in ways that they may not be for their
private impressions. In particular, nonsocial information that dif-
ferentiates between individuals may be required to justify public
choices. In Snyder, Kleck, Strenta, and Mentzer’s (1979) study, for
example, participants were given a choice of watching a movie
with either a handicapped person or a nonhandicapped person.
These participants, presumably motivated to sit with the nonhandi-
capped person, only did so when the two targets were watching
different movies; when the two targets were watching the same
movie, however, and thus did not have differentiating information,
participants were forced to sit with the handicapped person. This
kind of attributional ambiguity (Snyder et al., 1979) or elasticity
(Hsee, 1996) allows individuals to discriminate under the guise of
more acceptable criteria (e.g., movie preferences).

In the present studies, we were specifically interested in how
elasticity might allow people to justify decisions involving social
categories such as race or gender. It is important to note that many
real-world situations are elastic: Candidates for any position in-
variably have multiple dimensions on which to be evaluated. In the
studies reported below we used this natural elasticity to demon-
strate casuistry in decision making. Allport (1954) was among the
first to describe how individuals motivated by social category bias
marshal evidence to rationalize their prejudiced conclusions, by
engaging in selective perception of the social world. Hodson et al.
(2002) provided empirical evidence of this kind of strategy for
masking social category bias; in their study, participants choosing
between Black and White candidates for admission to college rated
both highly qualified and highly unqualified White and Black
applicants similarly. However, when qualifications were mixed
(candidates were good on one dimension and poor on another),
social category information influenced judgment, such that preju-
diced participants rated White candidates higher, whereas non-
prejudiced participants rated Black candidates more favorably.
Most interesting is that participants inflated the value of whichever
qualification their preferred candidate dominated the other candi-
date on (e.g., if they favored a Black candidate who had a higher
grade-point average [GPA] than a White candidate, they subse-
quently claimed that GPA was the more important qualification).
In the studies below, we used a paradigm similar to that developed
by Hodson et al., with several key differences. First, our paradigm
forces participants to make judgments between candidates by
selecting between members of different social categories, whereas
Hodson et al. did not require such explicit choice. Our forced-
choice paradigm has implications for the nature of the expression
of bias; whereas Hodson et al. argued that only mixed qualifica-
tions license biased judgment, we suggest that the forced-choice
nature of our paradigm, which requires choice in the way many
real-world situations do, allows for any elasticity—even between
two highly qualified or two unqualified candidates—to license
choice. Our desire to map these processes onto real-world situa-
tions underlies the importance of this kind of reweighting of
criteria to buttress questionable decisions, a process that may
account for a great deal of biased decision making in the real
world. As such, the present investigation builds on Hodson et al.’s
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

820 NORTON, VANDELLO, AND DARLEY

research by exploring the processes underlying the phenomenon
Gncluding the time course and the public and private components
of the bias) as well as exploring means of correcting the bias (e.g.,
forcing participants to equate the candidates and using real-world
manipulations such as precommitment and accountability).

Overview of the Experiments

We first explore casuistry in the domain of gender bias, pre-
senting two studies in which male participants engage in casuistry
when motivated to hire a male candidate. In Study 1, we demon-
strated the basic effect, showing that male participants who select
men for management positions justify that selection by inflating
the importance of whichever qualification favors a male candidate,
while failing to mention gender as a factor; in Study 2, we
eliminated gender bias by forcing participants themselves to re-
move the elasticity in the situation. We next show that the effect is
not used merely to justify in-group preferences, in a series of
studies in which predominantly White college students motivated
to favor Black candidates over equally qualified White candidates
also engage in casuistry to justify their decisions. In Study 3, we
demonstrated casuistry in the domain of college admissions and
find that the reshaping of qualifications also leads to distortions in
recall. Study 4 establishes that the phenomenon is not merely a
public strategy, as participants inflated the value of qualifications
favoring a preferred candidate on merely being exposed to candi-
dates’ resumes. Studies 5 and 6 demonstrate the robustness of the
phenomenon, as making participants accountable for their deci-
sions not only fails to attenuate use of social category information
but actually increases casuistry, and precommitment to qualifica-
tions also fails to decrease the bias.

Casuistry in Employment Decisions

In the first two studies, we wanted to establish the phenomenon
of casuistry, demonstrating that individuals making decisions
based on social category information would mask the true reasons
for their choices. Gender discrimination in employment is both
widely studied and widely documented. Women who enter tradi-
tionally male contexts may be seen as less competent than simi-
larly qualified men (Deaux & Emswiller, 1974), and in hiring
contexts in particular the “think manager—think male” phenome-
non is paramount: Both men and women see the characteristics
needed for success in management as stereotypically male (Eagly
& Karau, 2002; Schein, 1973, 1975). In the following studies,
therefore, we used a simulated employment context in which male
participants chose between male and female candidates for a
stereotypically male job, a situation that stacks the deck in favor of
discrimination against women. In the first study, participants se-
lected managers for a construction company and then explained
their decisions in an open-ended format. In the second study,
participants equated the qualifications of two candidates and then
chose between these candidates. In Study 1, we expected partici-
pants to select male managers regardless of qualifications yet
justify that selection in terms of those qualifications, increasing the
importance of whichever qualification favored the male candidate.
In Study 2, we expected the self-equating of the candidates to force
participants to forgo gender and instead rely on qualifications, but
we expected these participants to be less satisfied with their
choices as a result.

Study 1: Gender Bias in Construction Hiring

Male participants read a scenario in which they were asked to
play the role of a manager of a construction company whose task
was to recruit a high-level employee (adapted from Monin &
Miller, 2001). We expected our male participants to be motivated
to favor male candidates for this stereotypically male position and
then to justify their decisions by inflating the relative value of the
male candidate’s qualifications. We chose education and amount
of relevant experience as the two qualifications to be manipulated.
Because we used undergraduates in this investigation (who have
little work experience), we expected them to favor more educated
candidates in the absence of other information. The condition of
particular interest in the present study is that in which the candi-
date with the preferred qualification also holds the undesired social
category membership: the educated woman. We expected our male
participants to forgo the importance of education in this incongru-
ent condition and continue to select male candidates, by claiming
that experience was the more important qualification.

Method

Participants. Ninety-three male undergraduates completed the study in
groups of up to 20 as part of a larger packet of questionnaires and were
paid $8.

Procedure. Participants took part in an employee selection procedure
in which they, as heads of a construction company, had to select a
candidate for a stereotypically male job. We stated that the job required
both experience in the industry and a strong engineering background, thus
making our two key dimensions— experience and education—salient. Af-
ter reading this short paragraph, participants were instructed to rank five
candidates in order of their preference. Two of the candidates were clearly
better than the other three (and indeed, the vast majority of participants
ranked them first and second). One candidate had more experience in the
industry (9 vs. 5 years), and the other had more education (an engineering
degree and certification from the “American Concrete Masonry Associa-
tion” vs. an engineering degree only). We included other filler information
for the candidates (age and reason for seeking job), which were designed
to be similar. In the control condition, only first initials and last names were
provided, so that no gender information was available. In the two experi-
mental conditions, the first names of the candidates were provided, such
that the two superior candidates were of different genders: In the male-
educated condition, the male candidate had more education but less expe-
rience than the female candidate, and in the female-educated condition, the
female candidate had more education but less experience than the male
candidate.

After ranking their candidates, participants were asked an open-ended
question that explored how they would justify their decisions with little
prompting: “In the space below, briefly describe why you chose the
applicant you did. What was most important in determining your deci-
sion?” We expected that participants in the control and male-educated
conditions would report that education was more important but that par-
ticipants in the female-educated condition would reverse this preference
and report that experience was more important. We also expected few
participants to claim that gender influenced their decision.

Results and Discussion

One naive coder coded the open-ended responses for use of
gender pronouns and use of gender as justification. The same coder
and one of the authors coded which of the key qualifications—
experience or education—was listed as more important. Many
participants simply listed qualifications in order of importance; for
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CASUISTRY 821

those participants who wrote at greater length, the coders made a
subjective assessment of which qualification the participant felt
was more important. We used this dichotomous variable to explore
whether participants inflated the value of the qualification that
favored their chosen candidate. Agreement was high for these
ratings (r = .88, p < .001), and discrepancies were resolved by
using the naive coder’s ratings.

Participants in the control condition tended to view the candi-
dates as male, even in the absence of any gender information, as
34% (10/29) spontaneously used male pronouns, whereas only 3%
(1/29) used female pronouns.

Selection. As expected, our college population showed a
strong overall preference for education, picking the educated can-
didate over the experienced candidate 66% (61/93) of the time,
rd, N = 93) = 9.04, p < .005. This preference, however, was
moderated by our manipulations. In the control condition, as
predicted, there was a strong preference for the educated (and
presumed male by our participants) candidate (76%), and we
observed this same strong preference when the male candidate was
more educated (75%). When the female candidate was more edu-
cated, however, only 43% of participants picked the educated
candidate (see Table 1). The overall chi-square was significant,
(2, N = 93) = 9.18, p < .02, as was a planned contrast on
proportions comparing the female-educated condition with the
other conditions (Z = 6.04, p < .001 [Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1985],
residual Z = 0.27, ns). Thus, although education was seen as more
important in this decision, participants still selected the male
candidate the majority of the time even when he was less educated.

Justification. Crucial to our hypotheses, however, is that par-
ticipants justify their selection of candidates by stating that the
qualification that favored their preferred candidate was more im-
portant. As we would expect from our results above, the control
and male-educated conditions looked very similar, as 48% and
50%, respectively, listed education as more important than expe-
rience. In contrast, a strong preference emerged for experience as
the most important qualification in the female-educated condition,
as only 22% of participants ranked education as more important,
thus justifying participants’ selection of the more experienced
male (see Table 1). The overall chi-square was marginally signif-
icant, (2, N = 88) = 5.65, p = .059, and the same contrast on
proportions pitting the female-educated condition versus the other
conditions was again significant (Z = 2.63, p < .01, residual Z =
0.46, ns).

Equally important is that very few participants cited gender as
playing a role in their decision, in any of the conditions: control =
0%, male educated = 8% (3/36), female educated = 14% (4/29).
Overall, then, participants rarely made mention of gender in ex-
plaining their choice of candidate, although results clearly indicate
that gender affected candidate selection.

Table 1
Percentages of Participants Who Selected the Educated
Candidates and Ranked Education as More Important, Study 1

 

Selected educated Ranked education

 

Candidate candidate higher
Control (no gender) 76 (22/29) 48 (13/27)
Male, educated 75 (27/36) 50 (17/34)
Female, educated 43 (12/28) 22 (6/27)

 

Study 2: Attenuating Casuistry

Study 1 showed that male participants favored male candidates
by altering the relative importance of qualifications. In Study 2, we
hoped to show that by removing elasticity from the situation we
could circumvent gender-based selection, forcing men to rely on
qualifications. We accomplished this goal by providing incomplete
resumes and forcing participants to equate the two candidates
themselves, then asking them to choose between the two candi-
dates. Because Study 1 showed that undergraduates were more
likely to select more educated candidates over more experienced
candidates, we expected participants overall to favor the more
educated candidate when forced to choose, in line with Slovic
(1975), who showed that, after equating options, participants make
selections on the basis of the more important dimension. Although
male participants in Study 1 abandoned this preference for educa-
tion when a female candidate was more educated, we expected the
equating task to rule out this option. We expected male partici-
pants’ dissatisfaction with their inability to favor men to be re-
flected in their desire to review more resumes for the same posi-
tion; we predicted that male participants who were able to select
men would show less desire to review more resumes (perhaps
because future candidates might be more qualified women),
whereas male participants who were forced into picking women
(in the female-educated condition) would show a greater desire to
review more resumes (perhaps in the hope that a more qualified
man might come along).

Method

Participants. Participants were male undergraduates approached by

either a male or female experimenter (unaware of our hypotheses) in
campus dining halls; a total of 46 agreed to take part in the study.
We again used the construction scenario and presented
participants with abbreviated resumes for two candidates (to simplify the
task for participants, we removed the three filler candidates used in Study
1). The first candidate’s resume was complete (36 years of age, BS in
engineering, 9 years of relevant experience), whereas the second candi-
date’s resume included age (36) and education (BS in Engineering and
certification as a concrete technician) but lacked information regarding
years of relevant experience. Participants were instructed to fill in the
number of years of experience that would make the two candidates equally
qualified. As in Study 1, there were three conditions: (a) one in which no
gender information was provided; (b) one in which the first, less educated
candidate was male; and (c) one in which this candidate was female.

After participants completed this task, they turned to the next page, on
which they were asked to imagine that they had to choose between the two
candidates, given the qualifications on the previous page (including the
number of years of experience participants had filled in), and indicate
which of the candidates they felt would be best qualified. After making
their selection, participants were asked how likely they would be to review
more resumes before making this selection, on a 7-point scale (range: 1 =
not at all likely to 7 = very likely).

Procedure.

Results and Discussion

Participants in all three conditions felt that the second candidate
needed roughly 6 years of experience to make the two candidates
equal (M = 6.20, SD = 2.01), and this effect did not vary by
condition (F < 1). Thus, across all conditions participants were
selecting between similar pairs of candidates. We might have
expected these results to vary across condition, for the male
participants to see women as requiring more experience than male
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

822 NORTON, VANDELLO, AND DARLEY

candidates to make up the difference; at least in this phase,
however, our male participants rated the two similarly.

Participants in the control condition, as in Study 1, did show a
preference for the educated candidate, as 56% (9/16) picked the
more educated candidate. In the two gender conditions an even
stronger consensus emerged. Participants overwhelmingly selected
the more educated candidate, regardless of whether that candidate
was male (94%, 15/16) or female (79%, 11/14). Thus we observed
only a preference for education over experience, y°(2, N = 46) =
6.25, p < .05; as predicted, the contrast on proportions we used in
Study 1 comparing the female-educated condition to the others did
not approach significance (Z = .31, p = .37). In contrast to Study
1, participants were unable to favor members of a desired social
group.”

As we expected, men were not equally satisfied with the selec-
tion process across conditions. In general, participants wanted to
see more resumes (overall M = 5.83, SD = 1.32, well above the
scale midpoint of 4), 445) = 9.37, p < .001, which is not
surprising given the difficulty of choosing between two evenly
matched candidates. However, participants in the female-educated
condition expressed a stronger desire to seek more resumes (M =
6.29, SD = 0.83) than did the more satisfied participants in the
male-educated condition (MW = 5.25, SD = 1.77), and the no-
gender participants fell in the middle (M = 6.00, SD = 0.97), FQ,
45) = 2.69, p = .08. This difference approached significance
between the two gender conditions, (28) = 1.96, p = .06, al-
though neither gender condition differed significantly from the
control (ps > .15).

Summary of the Employment Studies

These two studies both demonstrated casuistry and attenuated
bias when elasticity was removed from the situation. From a
psychological standpoint, removing the effect with the manipula-
tion in Study 2 is important; from a practical standpoint, however,
this manipulation fails to map onto real-world situations— candi-
dates usually do not ask prospective employers to complete their
resumes for them. One of the goals of the experiments described in
the next section was to explore whether more real-world strategies
will also deny participants the opportunity to make biased choices.
In Studies 1 and 2, the pressure for participants to mask their bias
was quite clear, as the male participants understood (and, we hope,
all men understand) that selecting other men without regard to
qualifications is both sexist and illegal. It is possible that these
male participants who sought to favor other men consciously
inflated the value of the qualification that favored those candi-
dates; it is also possible, however, that the desire to favor one
gender causes participants to come to believe privately that those
qualifications that favored men truly were more important. An-
other goal of the experiments described in the next section was to
explore the more private aspects of casuistry by exploring whether
casuistry results in memory bias and whether inflation of preferred
candidates’ qualifications can occur prior to a decision. We also
sought to demonstrate that casuistry is used as a general strategy to
justify decisions in the social realm, not only for decisions that
favor in-groups (as in Studies 1 and 2). We thus chose to show that
White undergraduates, pressured by desires to be egalitarian,
norms of political correctness, or both, would favor Black candi-
dates for admission to college. More important, we wanted to show
that these participants would continue to engage in casuistry de-

spite this very different motivation, by inflating qualifications that
favored Black candidates to mask the impact of social categories
on their decisions.

Casuistry in College Admissions

In Studies 3 through 6, we tested the idea that participants would
overwhelmingly select a Black candidate over a White student for
admission to college, regardless of qualifications, and then justify
that choice by claiming their candidate was more qualified. Study
3 documents distortions in memory that accompany the biased
inflation of qualifications favoring preferred candidates. In Study
4, we showed that inflation of qualifications can occur before a
selection is made, on simply being exposed to candidates’ quali-
fications, addressing the possibility that casuistry occurs only as
postdecisional justification. Finally, we explored the real-world
robustness of casuistry, showing that making participants account-
able for their decisions not only fails to attenuate bias but actually
increases the tendency to reshape qualifications (Study 5) and that
precommitment to qualifications also fails to decrease the bias
(Study 6).

Affirmative Action and College Admissions

Some research has supported the view that White Americans are
opposed to affirmative action programs, including programs that
affect college admissions (Sniderman & Piazza, 1993), due in part
to the obvious fact that some Whites are prejudiced (e.g., James,
Brief, Dietz, & Cohen, 2001) but also due to Whites perceiving
affirmative action as violating the American creed of merit-based
achievement (e.g., Kravitz, 1995). When affirmative action is
framed as addressing injustice or inequity, however, Whites tend
to be more supportive (Peterson, 1994; Swim & Miller, 1999).
This support is probably multiply determined, by factors such as a
desire for equality (Son Hing, Bobocel, & Zanna, 2002); White
guilt (S. Steele, 1990); and, perhaps most important, a fear of being
labeled racist. In one recent investigation, racists were rated sim-
ilarly to terrorists and wife beaters (Crandall, Eshleman, &
O’Brien, 2002), and Whites are extremely hesitant to label their
own prejudiced attitudes as reflective of racism (Sommers &
Norton, 2004). Indeed, the large body of literature on aversive
racism (e.g., Dovidio & Gaertner, 1998) suggests that prejudice is
often expressed in disguised or rationalized ways because of this
fear of being so labeled. The present research suggests that this
fear can lead Whites to overcorrect, favoring members of minority
groups as a result of the dilemma with which they are faced.

The paradox of affirmative action for White Americans is that
selecting Black candidates on the basis of race can imply that these
candidates require preference to achieve equality, violating impor-
tant American values and raising the specter of past racism. Both

?It is possible that removing filler information from the resumes in
Study 2 made the task too obvious, such that it was not the removal of
elasticity that decreased bias but a heightened awareness of the nature of
the task. Although our results for selection cannot rule out this possibility,
our results suggesting that participants’ desire to view more resumes was
highest in the female-educated condition suggest that it was the removal of
elasticity in this key condition, rather than an overall tendency for partic-
ipants to guess the nature of the task, that accounts for attenuation of the
selection bias.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CASUISTRY 823

Whites who genuinely support affirmative action and Whites who
support affirmative action in name only, then, can be constrained
from publicly acknowledging that race played a role in any deci-
sion, or at least that race was the primary basis for judgment, even
when that decision favors a historically disadvantaged group.
Norton (2002), for example, found that 80% of White participants
were willing to state which of two White candidates would be
more successful in college solely on the basis of their photographs;
when the two photographs depicted candidates of different races,
however, only 50% were willing to make the same judgment. In
addition, the recent trend in judicial decisions has been to limit or
curtail the use of race as a criterion in decision making, making
even choices motivated purely by egalitarian motives suspect (e.g.,
Hopwood v. Texas, 1996). In sum, Whites are under a variety of
pressures to espouse affirmative action yet simultaneously are very
reluctant to use a social category to justify decisions based on race.
Thus, we predicted that being faced with these problematic choices
would cause participants to favor Black candidates while masking
the true reason for that preference.

Study 3: Casuistry and Memory Distortion

We created a hypothetical college admissions selection task in
which participants were asked to review resumes of high school
seniors and select students they thought were most deserving of
admission. We predicted that participants would be drawn to select
Black candidates over White candidates, regardless of the specific
qualifications of their resumes. After making their selections,
participants were asked to rank qualifications in order of impor-
tance for determining admission to college. We expected partici-
pants to justify their decisions by claiming that qualifications that
favored preferred candidates were more important.

In Study 3 we also begin to explore the private component of
casuistry by examining whether participants altered the numerical
value, and not just the relative ranking, of a preferred candidate’s
qualifications. We predicted that participants selecting a Black
candidate with higher GPA would not only see GPA as more
important in making admissions decisions but also would actually
inflate their preferred candidate’s advantage on that key dimension
(with parallel results for number of high school Advanced Place-
ment [AP] classes). After participants made their selections and
justifications, therefore, we asked them to recall details of the
candidate’s applications.

Method

Participants. Two hundred nine Princeton University students com-
pleted the study in groups of up to 20 as part of a larger packet of unrelated
questionnaires and were paid $8. Fifty-seven percent of the participants
were female, and 5% did not specify gender. Because of experimenter
error, we did not assess ethnicity in this study.

Pretest. To select criteria that would be roughly equal in importance,
we asked 31 undergraduates to rate a number of qualifications for how
important they were to being admitted to college on a 7-point scale (range:
1 = not at all to 7 = very). GPA and difficulty of high school classes
emerged as the highest ranked qualification (Ms = 6.19 and 5.81, respec-
tively) and, most important for the present investigation, were seen as
equally important. We therefore chose to use GPA and difficulty of high
school classes, operationalized as number of AP classes taken, as our
primary qualifications.

Participants were instructed to imagine that they were on
the admissions board at Princeton. To make political correctness norms

Procedure.

salient, all participants read a paragraph stating that “Some admissions
procedures are alleged to be biased, and activist groups are pressuring
colleges all over the country to review and reevaluate their admissions
criteria.” They received resumes from two male high school seniors and
were instructed to review the resumes and indicate which of the two
candidates they would choose to admit. Each resume included information
about GPA, SAT scores, number of AP classes, letters of recommendation
and essays received, and various extracurricular activities. The resumes
were designed such that the two candidates were as equally qualified as
possible, with equal cumulative SAT scores and the same number of
extracurricular activities and academic awards. The only substantive dif-
ference was that one candidate had a superior GPA (4.0 vs. 3.85), whereas
the other candidate had taken more AP classes (9 vs. 6). We counterbal-
anced whether the candidate with the higher GPA appeared first or second.
In addition, half of the participants were given information about the race
of the candidates—one Black, one White—in the form of attached photo-
graphs of two college-aged males (see Hodson et al., 2002, for a similar
paradigm), and half were not given any information about the race of the
candidates.

After selecting candidates, participants ranked eight qualifications (let-
ters of recommendation, GPA, student government, number of AP classes,
SAT Verbal, SAT Math, athletic participation, and essays) in order of
importance for admission to college. We created a dichotomous variable
assessing whether GPA or AP classes had been ranked higher. Participants
next completed unrelated questionnaires for approximately 15 min, were
confronted with a surprise recall task—the original candidates’ resumes,
but with all qualifications omitted—and were instructed to fill in as much
of the original information as possible.

Results

Selection. First, we observed a main effect of qualifications, as
more participants selected the candidate with more AP classes
(60%, 126/209) than the candidate with the higher GPA, rd, N=
209) = 8.85, p < .005. Participants in the two control (no social
category) conditions showed an equal aversion to the candidate
with a higher GPA, picking him only 23% of the time when they
saw this candidate first and 37% of the time when they saw him
second, rd, N = 104) = 2.25, ns. When faced with a White
candidate with a higher GPA, participants again showed a prefer-
ence for AP classes, selecting this candidate only 26% of the time;
when the Black candidate had the higher GPA, however, prefer-
ences drastically reversed, and the overwhelming majority chose
this candidate (75%), rd, N = 105) = 24.77, p < .001 (see
Table 2).?

Justification. Although there was a clear preference for select-
ing candidates with more AP classes, we observed a main effect of
qualifications such that participants were more likely to rank GPA
higher than number of AP classes (63%, 131/209), rd, N=
209) = 13.44, p < .001. This effect, however, was driven entirely
by one cell. Participants in the two control conditions ranked GPA
first roughly half the time (57% and 56%, x” < 1, ns). When the
White candidate had a higher GPA, participants again showed only

3 In this and all of the admissions studies we explored a moderating role
for participant gender and found little evidence that gender affected our
results. In Study 3, for example, both genders chose the candidate with
more AP classes the vast majority of the time in all conditions (two
controls: men: 39% and 29%, women: 41% and 19%; White with higher
GPA: men: 30%, women: 17%) except for the key condition in which the
Black candidate had the higher GPA, when preferences reversed for both
genders (men: 74%, women: 76%). We thus do not discuss further a role
for gender in these studies.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

824 NORTON, VANDELLO, AND DARLEY

a mild preference, with 56% ranking GPA as more important;
when the Black candidate had the higher GPA, however, 84% of
participants ranked GPA higher, y°(1, N = 104) = 9.86, p < .01
(see Table 2).

Memory data. We were interested in whether people would
exaggerate their preferred candidate’s qualifications. We created
difference scores for recall of both GPA and AP classes for the two
candidates. For GPA, the overall interaction was marginally sig-
nificant, F(1, 205) = 3.25, p = .07. Participants’ estimates did not
differ when no racial information was provided (Ms = 0.15 and
0.16, SDs = 0.04 and 0.11, ¢ < 1). Participants who saw a Black
candidate with a higher GPA—those participants particularly mo-
tivated to see GPA as important—inflated the difference between
the two candidates’ GPAs (M = 0.19, SD = 0.12), whereas those
who saw a White candidate with a higher GPA did not (M = 0.15,
SD = 0.08), a difference that approached significance, 199) =
1.81,p= .073.* We found no evidence for a similar phenomenon
with AP classes (F < 1, ns), due primarily to the fact that recall
was extremely accurate on this measure, with only a 6% error rate;
for GPA, in contrast, the error rate was 14%.

Discussion

When making a choice between two equally attractive college
candidates, participants overwhelmingly selected Black candidates
and justified this decision by inflating the importance of whichever
qualification favored the Black candidate. When the Black candi-
date had a higher GPA than the White candidate, participants
inflated the importance of GPA, and when the Black candidate had
taken more AP classes than the White candidate, participants did
not. Study 3 also offers some evidence that casuistry is not merely
a strategy intended for public consumption, as participants showed
some tendency to misremember differences in qualifications be-
tween candidates and, more important, did so in a way that would
buttress their preference for Black candidates. It is difficult to
imagine participants strategically reporting differences in GPA,
both because they had been given instructions regarding accuracy
and because misreporting information in this context would be a
poor justificatory attempt. These memory distortions occurred
after participants had selected candidates; in the next study we
examined information processing before selection, to see whether
reshaping of qualifications can occur before participants commit
themselves to a candidate.

Table 2

Percentages of Participants Who Selected the Candidate With a
Higher Grade-Point Average (GPA) and Ranked GPA as More
Important, Study 3

 

 

Selected candidate Ranked GPA
Condition with higher GPA higher
Control 1 (no race) 23 (12/52) 57 (30/53)
Control 2 (no race) 37 (19/52) 56 (29/52)
White candidate higher GPA 26 (14/54) 56 (30/54)
Black candidate higher GPA 75 (38/51) 84 (42/50)

 

Note. The two control conditions are a result of counterbalancing
qualifications.

Study 4: Temporal Sequence of Casuistry

In Study 3, participants selected candidates and then ranked
qualifications after that decision had been made. Decades of re-
search on cognitive dissonance show that individuals inflate the
value of selected options to reduce dissonance (e.g., Brehm, 1956).
Is the casuistry we find in the present studies simply postdecisional
justification, or can the reshaping of qualifications occur prior to a
decision (see Brownstein, 2003), on merely being exposed to
information that is tainted by social category? In Study 4 we
explored whether actual expression of a decision is necessary to
witness the established pattern of inflating the importance of
qualifications that favor Black candidates. If inflation of qualifi-
cations occurs only after decisions have been made, then the
process might be seen more as justification: Only after choosing do
people feel compelled to reshape criteria. Finding inflation prior to
choice would demonstrate that participants do not simply select
Black candidates and then inflate the value of whichever criterion
favors them but that they may come to see these candidates’
qualifications as truly more impressive and make selections on the
basis of those qualifications.

Method

Participants. Participants were 154 Princeton undergraduates who
completed the questionnaire as part of a mass testing session in groups of
up to 20 and were paid $8 for their participation. Fifty-six percent were
female; 62% were White, 15% were Asian, 11% were Black, 4% were
Hispanic, 7% reported “other” ethnicity, and 3 participants did not report
ethnicity.

Procedure. The design was a 2 (qualifications: Black candidate higher
GPA/Black candidate more AP classes) X 2 (select candidate first/rank
qualifications first). We used the same resumes as in Study 3, but in Study
4 all resumes included social category information. Participants in the
select-first condition picked the candidate they felt was most qualified and
then ranked qualifications (as in previous studies). Participants in the
rank-first condition were given no indication that they would be asked to
choose between candidates, but simply read that we were interested in what
qualifications were most important in making admissions decisions and
that they could look at a few sample resumes to get a sense of some
relevant qualifications. These participants were then given a list of quali-
fications and asked to rank which they felt were most important in making
admission decisions. Only after completing this task were these partici-
pants asked to return to the sample resumes and select a candidate.

Results

Selection. As before, the vast majority (79%) of participants
selected Black candidates over White candidates, rd, N=
154) = 52.60, p < .001. It is important to note that this effect held
regardless of that candidate’s qualifications: When the Black can-
didate had the higher GPA, participants selected him 77% (59/77)
of the time, and when he had more AP classes he was chosen 82%
(63/77) of the time (y* < 1, ns). Most relevant to the present

* Another strategy for exploring memory errors is to test directly for
accuracy, by conducting one-sample f tests (test value = 0.15). Participants
accurately remembered the candidates’ GPAs when no racial information
was attached and when the White candidate had a higher GPA (all ts < 1),
but those who saw a Black candidate with a higher GPA significantly
inflated the difference between the two candidates’ GPAs, (49) = 2.15,
p< .04.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CASUISTRY 825

investigation is that the strong preference for Black candidates did
not vary whether participants ranked qualifications first (83%) or
selected candidates first (76%, x <1, ns; see Table 3)°

Justification. Although no consensus on qualifications emerged
in selection, GPA was ranked higher than AP classes 71% of the
time across versions, rd, N = 154) = 26.60, p < .001. As
predicted, however, this preference for GPA was moderated by our
manipulations. GPA was ranked higher than AP classes 81%
(62/77) of the time when the Black candidate had the higher GPA,
a number that dropped to 61% (47/77) when the White candidate
had the higher GPA, rd, N = 154) = 7.06, p < .01. Most
important to the present investigation is that the relatively higher
ranking for whichever qualification favored the Black candidate
was the same whether participants made their selections before
ranking qualifications or after (89% vs. 74% when the Black
candidate had the higher GPA; 63% vs. 60% when the White
candidate did), rd, N = 154) = 1.51, ns (see Table 3). Inflation
of qualifications, therefore, is not driven only by postdecisional,
strategic concerns but also appears to occur even when merely
exposed to resumes.

Discussion

We again found a strong preference for selecting Black candi-
dates regardless of their qualifications. What is most striking about
this study is the marked similarity in results for the two conditions.
Whether participants selected candidates and then ranked qualifi-
cations, or merely glanced at resumes, ranked qualifications, and
then made their selections, there was a strong tendency both to
select Black candidates and inflate the value of qualifications that
favored these candidates. The fact that participants were given no
indication that they would have to select between the candidates in
the rank-first condition, yet still inflated qualifications, suggests
that there is a change in meaning of qualifications when those
qualifications are paired with different social categories: Partici-
pants did not merely justify their decisions by strategically inflat-
ing the value of whichever criterion favored their preferred can-
didate but actually saw that person’s qualifications as more
impressive even before knowing they would be asked to select.®
As in Study 3, in which memories were distorted to support biased
decisions, this predecisional inflation we found in the present study
suggests that casuistry, although certainly containing strategic
elements, also has private components.

Study 5: Accountability and Casuistry

Having established the phenomenon and found some support for
casuistry as a private process, we next wanted to explore the more

Table 3

Percentages of Participants Who Selected the Candidate With a
Higher Grade-Point Average (GPA) and Ranked GPA as More
Important, as a Function of Order of Ranking, Study 4

 

 

Selected candidate Ranked GPA
Condition with higher GPA higher

Black candidate higher GPA

Rank first 77 (27/35) 89 (31/35)

Select first 76 (32/42) 74 (31/42)
White candidate higher GPA

Rank first 11 (4/35) 63 (22/35)

Select first 24 (10/42) 60 (25/42)

 

public aspects of casuistry, by making the situation more like
real-world decisions. In Studies 1 through 4, participants were not
called on to explain their decisions. In Study 5, we made the
selection process public by asking participants to explain to an
interviewer why they selected the candidate they did. Such ac-
countability (Tetlock, 1992) is commonly viewed as means of
reducing bias, and one possibility is that making decisions more
public would prevent our participants from engaging in casuistry.
The effects of accountability pressures are more complex (see
Lerner & Tetlock, 1999), however; in some situations accountabil-
ity can enhance bias, as with its amplifying effect on commitment
to decisions (Simonson & Staw, 1992). Accountability thus may
do little to improve selection biases and because of its amplifica-
tion of commitment may increase the extent to which participants
engage in casuistry to justify those decisions. We expected partic-
ipants to continue to select Black candidates when held account-
able and to justify their decisions by inflating the value of quali-
fications that favored Black candidates to an even greater extent.

Finally, our accountability manipulation offered an opportunity
to demonstrate people’s reluctance to cite race as a factor in
decision making. Participants who were made accountable for their
decisions were asked to explain after completing the task how they
had made their decisions, and we coded their responses for any
mention of race.

Method

Participants. One hundred twenty-three Princeton undergraduates
took part in groups of up to 4 to fulfill a course requirement. Fifty-seven
percent were female; 75% were White, 9% were Black, 9% were Asian,
4% were Hispanic, and 3% reported “other” ethnicity. One participant did
not report ethnicity.

Procedure. We used the same resumes as in Study 4. Our design was
a 2 (qualifications: Black candidate with a higher GPA/Black candidate
with more AP classes) X 2 (accountability/no accountability). After par-
ticipants arrived in the laboratory, the experimenter told participants in the
accountability condition that he was pilot testing resumes and thus would
ask participants a series of questions after they were done about how they
had made their selection and about which qualifications were important in
making that decision. Participants in the no-accountability condition were
simply reminded that their responses were anonymous. Participants then
viewed the resumes, made their selection, and completed the other depen-
dent measures. First, participants ranked qualifications in order of impor-
tance. As a manipulation check on accountability, we asked participants to
rank, on a 7-point scale (range: | = not at all to 7 = extremely), how
difficult their decision had been. Finally, participants in the accountability
condition were taken individually into a private room (so that the other
participants could not hear them) and were asked to explain to the exper-

>In Studies 4 through 6 we explored a role for participant race as a
moderator. Although it would have been ideal to analyze White and Black
participants separately, our small number of Black participants precludes
such analyses. The data for White participants alone look very similar to
the overall data in Study 4: They selected the candidate with the higher
GPA 79% (rank first) and 75% (select first) of the time when that candidate
was Black, but these numbers dropped to 10% and 26%, respectively, when
that candidate was White.

It is possible that participants were able to guess that they would be
asked to make a decision, complicating the degree to which these decisions
can truly be seen as private, an issue to which we return in the General
Discussion.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

826 NORTON, VANDELLO, AND DARLEY

imenter how they had made their decision. The experimenter coded the
responses for any mention of race.

Results

Manipulation check. As expected, participants who were ac-
countable found the decision more difficult (MW = 6.47, SD = 0.87)
than those who were not accountable (M = 6.10, SD = 1.19),
#120) = 1.99, p < .05.

Selection. As before, selection was driven by race, not quali-
fications, as 77% (95/123) of the participants selected Black can-
didates, rd, N = 123) = 36.50, p < .001. Participants in the
no-accountability condition selected the candidate with the higher
GPA 70% of the time when that candidate was Black but only 21%
of the time when that candidate was White, rd, N= 70) = 16.85,
p < .001, similar to participants in the accountability condition
(77% and 15%, respectively), rd, N = 53) = 20.62, p < .001
(see Table 4). There was no effect of accountability on candidate
selection; although participants were slightly more likely to select
the Black candidate when they knew they would be held account-

able (81% vs. 74%), this difference was not significant
OC < 1, ns).
Justification. We next checked to see whether participants

inflated the value of the qualifications that favored the Black
candidate, and they had. In the no-accountability condition, 70% of
participants ranked GPA higher when the Black candidate had the
higher GPA, whereas only 45% ranked GPA higher when the
Black candidate had taken more AP classes, rd, N= 70) = 443,
p < .05, results that were amplified in the accountability condition,
in which 81% ranked GPA higher when the Black candidate had
the higher GPA, whereas only 30% did so when the Black candi-
date had taken more AP classes, rd, N = 50) = 13.98, p < .001.
Looking directly at the effect of accountability, although 63%
(44/70) of participants in the no-accountability condition ranked
whichever qualification favored the Black candidate higher, some
76% (40/53) did so in the accountability condition, although this
effect only approached significance, y°(1, N = 123) = 2.22,
p= 4.

Another method of assessing the impact of accountability on
casuistry is to explore whether accountability increased people’s
consistency in justifying their selections. The overall strength of
the relationship of ranking the qualification higher that favored
one’s chosen candidate was quite high, r(123) = .74, p < .001;
thus, participants who selected a candidate with a higher GPA
were quite likely to rank GPA higher. This relationship was
weaker for participants in the no-accountability condition, how-

Table 4

Percentages of Participants Who Selected the Candidate With a
Higher Grade-Point Average (GPA) and Ranked GPA as More
Important, as a Function of Accountability, Study 5

 

 

Selected candidate Ranked GPA
Condition with higher GPA higher
Black candidate higher GPA
Accountable 77 (20/26) 81 (21/26)
Not accountable 70 (26/37) 70 (26/37)
White candidate higher GPA
Accountable 15 (4/27) 30 (8/27)
Not accountable 21 (7/33) 45 (15/33)

 

ever, (70) = .68, and stronger for those in the accountability
condition, 7(53) = .83, Z = 1.92, p < .05.

Mentions of race in posttask interviews. After the task, partic-
ipants in the accountability condition were asked to explain their
decisions, and the experimenter coded whether participants men-
tioned race as a factor in their decisions. Our premise was that
people would be reluctant to mention race, and indeed participants
were unlikely to do so, as 81% (43/53) did not. In addition, of the
participants who did mention race, 8 of 10 mentioned it last when
explaining their decisions. We correlated mentions of race with
participants’ selections and found that those who mentioned race
were somewhat more likely to select the Black candidate, although
this relationship was only marginally significant (r = .23, p =
.09). When we removed these participants from our selection
analyses, the strong preference for the Black candidate still held, as
77% (33/43) still picked this candidate.

Discussion

Participants who made decisions in private, as in previous
studies, overwhelmingly selected Black candidates and inflated the
value of qualifications that favored these candidates. Participants
under accountability were guilty of these same biases, only more
so, as they were even more consistent in their inflation, as reflected
in the increased correlation between selection and justification. In
addition, we demonstrated participants’ reluctance to use race in
justifying these decisions. Thus, a necessary precondition for ca-
suistry, a motive to conceal a forbidden preference, was
supported.”

Study 6: Precommitment and Casuistry

Given the robustness of both selection and justification biases
under conditions of accountability, we next wanted to test another
method of eliminating the bias, one used in some form in many
organizations: committing people to the criteria they will use to
make a decision before any candidates are reviewed. Whereas in
previous studies participants selected their candidates, then ranked
qualifications (or, in one condition of Study 4, saw resumes before
ranking and then selected their candidates), in Study 6 we com-
mitted them to their rankings of qualifications before they were
given access to any resumes. In this design, if participants rank
GPA higher than AP classes, they should be bound to pick the
candidate who dominates on that qualification when they are given
resumes. If participants continue to make selections on the basis of
race despite this commitment, then we expect them to engage in
selective reweighting of qualifications, retrospectively increasing
the importance of the qualification that favors their candidate. This
design also allows us to explore whether participants who ignore
their prerankings in order to favor a Black candidate are less
certain about their decisions or whether casuistry allows them to

7 We do not suggest that accountability pressures will never improve
selection biases; accountability in the employment studies, for example,
may have motivated male participants to base their selections on qualifi-
cations. Although the effects of accountability on selection may be varied,
we argue that accountability will always increase casuistry, leading par-
ticipants to inflate qualifications to justify their choices to an even greater
degree.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CASUISTRY 827

view their decisions—and thus themselves—as positively as their
consistent counterparts.

Method

Participants. Seventy-two Princeton undergraduates completed the
questionnaire as part of a mass testing session in groups of up to 20 and
were paid $8 for their participation. Sixty-five percent were female; 61%
were White, 15% were Asian, 8% were Black, 8% were Hispanic, and 7%
reported “other” ethnicity.

Procedure. We used the same resumes as in Studies 4 and 5 but made
two modifications to the procedure. First, prior to reviewing any resumes,
participants were asked to prerank the eight qualifications in order of
importance before they made their selection (and before they knew there
was a selection to be made). In contrast to all of the earlier studies, then,
participants ranked qualifications without seeing any actual resumes. Par-
ticipants were then given resumes to review, made their selections, and
then were asked to rerank the same qualifications as before. Second, we
added two dependent variables designed to assess participants’ impressions
of their decisions, asking them how difficult their decision had been, and
how confident they were in their decision, both rated on 7-point scales
(range: 1 = not at all to 7 = extremely).

Results

Prerankings. There was a strong preference for GPA as being
more important than number of AP classes, as 86% of the partic-
ipants ranked it higher before seeing any candidate resumes over-
all, rd, N = 72) = 37.56, p < .001, with results—not surpris-
ingly—similar whether participants were going to see a Black
candidate with a higher GPA (84%) or a White candidate with a
higher GPA (88%; see Table 5). Thus, participants should have
been bound to select candidates with higher GPAs in the selection
phase, regardless of the race of the candidate who actually had a
higher GPA.

Selection. This was clearly not the case, however, because,
replicating results from earlier studies, 76% of the participants
(55/72) selected the Black candidate regardless of qualifications,
(1, N = 72) = 20.06, p < .001. Replicating results from earlier
studies, 84% of participants selected the candidate with the higher
GPA when this candidate was Black, but this number dropped to
32% when that candidate was White, rd, N = 72) = 20.06, p <
.001 (see Table 5).

Postrankings. It is interesting that although participants were
not bound by their prerankings in making selections, they appeared
to be bound somewhat by their prerankings here, as participants in
both conditions still ranked GPA as more important in both con-
ditions: 84% when the Black candidate had the higher GPA, and
74% when the White candidate had the higher GPA. In other
words, despite the fact that participants chose the candidate with
the higher GPA only 31% of the time when that candidate was
White, these participants still reported that GPA was most impor-

Table 5

tant 74% of the time (see Table 5). This 74% postranking repre-
sents a drop from 88% in the prerankings but is not dramatic
enough to mirror the results for selection and is not statistically
significant, rd, N = 72) = 1.24, ns.

Consistent versus inconsistent participants. The results above
reflect the fact that some participants selected candidates with
qualifications that did not match participants’ own prerankings of
importance. It is not surprising that, of the 27 participants who
were inconsistent, nearly all (85%) contradicted their preranking
order so that they could select the Black candidate. Did these
participants see their decision as less valid as a result of their
inconsistency? Hardly—there were no differences between con-
sistent and inconsistent participants when rating how difficult the
decision was (consistent: M = 5.67, SD = 1.54; inconsistent: M =
5.67, SD = 1.14) or how confident they were that they had made
the correct decision (consistent: M = 4.04, SD = 4.48; inconsis-
tent: M = 4.30, SD = 1.33; ts < 1). These results echo those
obtained by Batson et al. (2002) in their work on moral hypocrisy,
as participants who cheated in a coin flip to assign themselves a
positive task failed to update (or downgrade) their feelings of
morality as a result.

The fact that posttask ratings of difficulty and confidence do not
differ for inconsistent participants may be due to the fact that
although the overall correlation between preranking and selec-
tion—the extent to which participants who ranked GPA higher
selected the candidate with the higher GPA—was low, r(72) =
.16, p = .18, the correlation between postrankings and selection
was highly significant, (72) = .42, p < .001. Although some
participants made inconsistent choices initially, by the end of the
task they had made their selections more consistent with their
reinterpretations of the importance of the qualifications that fa-
vored their selection. Thus, although not all participants who made
inconsistent selections changed their postrankings to justify these
choices, the trend was to do so.

Discussion

Despite committing themselves to qualifications before making
selections, participants faced with the dilemma of rejecting a Black
candidate managed to overcome this obstacle and continue to favor
this candidate. Participants whose prerankings allowed them to be
consistent when selecting the Black candidate were faced with an
easy task. Participants who were forced to be inconsistent (e.g.,
preranking GPA higher, then selecting a candidate with a lower
GPA) were presented with two dilemmas, of which only one could
be solved: being consistent with prerankings or selecting the Black
candidate. Our participants overwhelmingly chose the inconsis-
tency that would allow them to continue to favor the Black
candidate, showing that this desire overwhelmed the desire for
consistency. Having made this choice, however, some participants

Percentages of Participants Who Ranked Grade-Point Average (GPA) Higher (Pre- and
Postcommitment) and Selected the Candidate With a Higher GPA, Study 6

 

Ranked GPA higher

Selected candidate Ranked GPA higher

 

Candidate (precommitment) with higher GPA (postcommitment)
Black candidate higher GPA 84 (32/38) 84 (32/38) 84 (32/38)
White candidate higher GPA 88 (30/34) 32 (11/34) 74 (25/34)

 
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

828 NORTON, VANDELLO, AND DARLEY

then altered their postrankings of qualifications in an attempt to
regain some of that consistency, as evidenced by the increased
correlation between selection and postrankings. Thus, one kind of
inconsistency (changing rankings from pre to post) was used to
justify another (selecting candidates who violate prerankings).

Summary of the Admissions Studies

The admissions studies accomplished three main goals. First, we
demonstrated casuistry in another domain, one in which our pre-
dominantly White participants were motivated to favor members
of a different social group. Second, we found some evidence for
private aspects of casuistry, as participants made memory errors in
line with their biased preferences (Study 3) and reshaped criteria
before making selections (Study 4). Third, we demonstrated the
robustness of the phenomenon, as manipulations designed to de-
crease the bias did little to eliminate the effect; accountability
pressures, in fact, enhanced participants’ tendency to inflate the
value of qualifications that favored Black candidates (Study 5),
and precommitment simply led some participants to change their
rankings of qualifications post hoc to justify their biased choices
(Study 6).

The casuistry we witnessed when participants faced the pres-
sures of making choices that favored an in-group (Studies 1 and 2)
also occurred when participants made choices that favored an
out-group (Studies 3-6). This difference in direction of bias in the
employment studies and the admissions studies warrants comment;
in the employment studies, male participants favored other men for
a job unless forced to forgo that preference, which is hardly an
egalitarian or politically correct choice, whereas in the admissions
studies this same participant population favored Black candidates,
a more egalitarian or politically correct choice. This preference for
Black candidates cannot be attributed to our inclusion of female
participants in the admissions studies, because gender does not
moderate our effects; neither can it be attributed solely to the
egalitarian views of our sample, as this same population recently
was shown to discriminate against Blacks (e.g., Monin & Miller,
2001). In part, this difference is due to the fact that sexist behavior
is more socially sanctioned than racist behavior (e.g., Rodin, Price,
Bryson, & Sanchez, 1990). In addition, however, we suggest that
the difference is due in part to participants’ desire to follow the
prevailing norm; in the employment scenario there is some reason
to believe that the job truly would be better for a man, and thus
participants follow this norm, whereas the strong support for
affirmative action among college undergraduates makes favoring
Black candidates the norm. These findings are especially interest-
ing when considered in light of theories of aversive racism (Gaert-
ner & Dovidio, 1986). Our participants are not expressing preju-
dice in subtle ways—as when licensed by additional information
(Darley & Gross, 1983)—but are instead expressing politically
correct beliefs when licensed to do so. As outlined in the beginning
of this article, we suggest that the forced-choice nature of our
paradigm highlights the potential danger of decision making in-
volving social categories, motivating participants to follow the
prevailing norm rather than their prejudiced inclinations. Most
important for our argument is that, despite the different initial
motivations (favoring male candidates vs. favoring Black candi-
dates), participants engage in the same strategy to mask their use
of social category information.

General Discussion

How do individuals engage in biased behavior while retaining a
view of the self as objective? The present research was designed to
investigate the casuistry that often accompanies such behavior,
exploring the process by which individuals’ questionable decision
making based on social category information can be licensed by
their arbitrary inflation of qualifications that favor preferred can-
didates. We demonstrated the phenomenon in two domains, one in
which men inflated the value of experience or education to favor
male job candidates and one in which predominantly White par-
ticipants inflated the importance of GPA or number of AP classes
to favor Black candidates for admission to college. The two sets of
studies differ, importantly, in participants’ motivation to hide their
use of social categories, demonstrating the breadth of the phenom-
enon. In the employment studies, the reason for casuistry is clear,
as men masked their preferences for members of their same social
category. The admissions studies, on the other hand, reveal that
individuals mask use of social category information even when
they seek to favor members of different social groups. Both cases,
however, share the common feature of using casuistry to mask
decision making that is based on questionable desires. Given the
small proportion of participants who cited social category infor-
mation as a factor in their decision making (Studies 1 and 5)—yet
the overwhelming proportion of participants in each study who did
so—it appears that casuistry is an effective technique in licensing
use of social category information.

The Public and Private Nature of Casuistry

In the beginning of this article, we introduced casuistry as a
strategy that addresses both the public and private dilemmas in
which people confronted with choices like those in our paradigms
face: the public fear of being seen as biased and efforts to justify
that behavior to others and private concerns about being biased and
efforts to rationalize that behavior to oneself. Many of the studies
we report here were specifically designed to address this issue. It
is quite clear that the phenomenon can be entirely conscious and
strategic, as when a sexist employer who reviews resumes wanting
to hire a man looks for whichever qualification will favor a male
candidate and then announces to the company that the man has
been hired on this basis. This would be an effective technique for
justification, but casuistry could also involve rationalization: It is
also possible that the employer may truly wish to avoid using
social category information, despite some sexist attitudes, yet
unknowingly allow these stereotypes to influence his review of
resumes. This well-intentioned manager may end up picking the
man but truly believe that this candidate is more qualified.

Although the studies reported in this article do not offer con-
clusive evidence that casuistry is in part a private strategy intended
for the self, several offer support for such an interpretation. The
memory distortions we observed in Study 3, for example, which
suggest that individuals reshape not only the relative rankings but
also the absolute values of qualifications in order to support
preferred conclusions, are difficult to cast as a strategy for public
consumption. It is hard to imagine that misrecalling information
about candidates would be an effective means of justifying one’s
decisions to others, who may have access to the original, accurate
information. The prechoice reweighting of qualifications in Study
4, as well, seems unlikely to be targeted entirely for public justi-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CASUISTRY 829

fication. As alluded to in footnote 6, it is certainly possible that
participants anticipated the choice, thus making the shift in rank-
ings prior to choice due more to anticipated dissonance—a point to
which we return below. However, even if participants are aware
that a choice is imminent, and shift their rankings in anticipation,
this is clearly not a strategy intended for public consumption, as
there is no need to justify choices to others when one has not
committed to any choice. There is reason to justify one’s choice to
oneself even before one has chosen, however: to reduce one’s
privately experienced conflict.

The two manipulations we included to mimic more real-world
pressures on decision making, accountability, and precommitment
also shed light on the nature of casuistry through their collective
failure to reduce bias. The fact that many of the studies were
conducted in large, anonymous testing sessions may have served to
minimize public pressures in general, supporting a view of casu-
istry as a private process. We used an accountability manipulation
in Study 5 specifically to increase public pressure; if casuistry
were an entirely public process, then this incentive should have
been sufficient to reduce bias. Instead, even in the face of a public
explanation of the decision, bias was not reduced, and casu-
istry—as measured by the increased correlation between selection
and justification when participants were held accountable—actu-
ally increased. A commitment to qualifications before selection
also failed to attenuate bias in Study 6, as participants continued to
make selections based on social category even when that choice
was inconsistent with their stated rankings of qualifications. Al-
though this may be a conscious strategy, our data suggesting that
these inconsistent participants were just as certain of their choice,
and found the choice no more difficult, raise the possibility that
these subtle shifts occur outside of awareness, or we might expect
some acknowledgment that the process was more difficult when
participants had to reshape qualifications post hoc. With the exer-
cise of parsing out conscious and unconscious aspects of psycho-
logical phenomena a difficult task as always (see Tetlock &
Manstead, 1985), it appears probable that casuistry has both public
and private functions, serving to justify one’s decisions to others
and rationalize one’s decisions to oneself.

Casuistry and Dissonance

The view that casuistry is at least in part a private process that
serves as a means of rationalizing one’s questionable actions to
oneself, again echoes those versions of cognitive dissonance the-
ory that stress the role of threats to the self. As we discussed in the
beginning of this article, in one sense casuistry can be seen as a
form of dissonance reduction; the subtle shift in pre- and post-
selection rankings in Study 6, for example, can be seen as a means
of reducing dissonance caused by the inconsistency of one’s
choice with one’s previous rankings. The shift in rankings of
qualifications prior to selection in Study 4, again, might be seen as
due to a desire to reduce the dissonance one expects to experience
when actually committing to the questionable choice, supporting
an anticipated-dissonance interpretation (Festinger, 1964). Our
results have implications for dissonance theory in general, as well.
In forced-choice dissonance paradigms in general, dissonance is
usually reduced by inflating the value of the chosen option, often
on whichever dimension seems most important. Our paradigm
complicates this process, as the dimension that seems most impor-
tant (and in fact is most important, as our selection results clearly

reveal in all studies) is the social category membership of the
candidates. We find that despite this new constraint, participants
are able to cope with dissonance more creatively, by recruiting
alternative attributes to rationalize their decisions.

Conclusion

The present research demonstrates, in two different domains,
how the social world can be (re)constructed both to justify ques-
tionable decisions to others and to support a view of the self as
unbiased—and, most important, that this restructuring has real
repercussions for others: those we judge. More generally, we
believe that this restructuring is a common means of abjuring
responsibility for one’s choices in morally loaded domains, from
justifying discriminating against—or in favor of—individuals on
the basis of their physical attractiveness to masking one’s purchase
of pomography by feigning interest in the magazine’s journalistic
integrity. Most troubling is that if casuistry causes people truly to
believe in their justifications, then their subsequent behavior can
be seen as dictated by the situation, not by any personal bias or
failing. Social psychologists tend to focus on how situations com-
pel behavior; casuistry demonstrates how individuals can cre-
atively structure situations to compel their own behavior. Because
the true reasons for decisions are often problematic, individuals
look to other aspects of the situation that can be brought to bear,
and end up using less diagnostic information to justify their deci-
sions, both to themselves and others.

References

Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Reading, MA: Perseus.

Aronson, E. (1968). Dissonance theory: Progress and problems. In R. P.
Abelson, E. Aronson, W. J. McGuire, T. M. Newcomb, M. J. Rosenberg,
& P. H. Tannenbaum (Eds.), Theories of cognitive consistency: A
source-book (pp. 5-27). Chicago: Rand McNally.

Bandura, A. (1999). Moral disengagement in the perpetration of inhuman-
ities. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 3, 193-209.

Batson, C. D., Thompson, E. R., & Chen, H. (2002). Moral hypocrisy:
Addressing some alternatives. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 83, 330-339.

Brehm, J. W. (1956). Postdecision changes in the desirability of alterna-
tives. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 52, 384-389.

Brown, J. D., & Rogers, R. J. (1991). Self-serving attributions: The role of
physiological arousal. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17,
501-506.

Brownstein, A. L. (2003). Biased predecision processing. Psychological
Bulletin, 129, 545-568.

Cooper, J., & Fazio, R. (1984). A new look at dissonance. In L. Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 17, pp. 229-
268). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Crandall, C. S., Eshleman, A., & O’Brien, L. (2002). Social norms and the
expression and suppression of prejudice: The struggle for internalization.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 359-378.

Darley, J. M., & Gross, P. H. (1983). A hypothesis-confirming bias in
labeling effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44,
20-33.

Deaux, K., & Emswiller, T. (1974). Explanations of successful perfor-
mance on sex-linked tasks: What is skill for the male is luck for the
female. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 29, 80-85.

Devine, P. G. (1989). Stereotypes and prejudice: Their automatic and
controlled components. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
56, 5-18.

Ditto, P. H., & Lopez, D. F. (1992). Motivated skepticism: Use of differ-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

830 NORTON, VANDELLO, AND DARLEY

ential decision criteria for preferred and nonpreferred conclusions. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 568-584.

Dovidio, J. F., & Gaertner, S. L. (1998). On the nature of contemporary
prejudice: The causes, consequences, and challenges of aversive racism.
In J. L. Eberhardt & S. T. Fiske (Eds.), Confronting racism: The problem
and the response (pp. 3-32). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Dovidio, J. F., & Gaertner, S. L. (2000). Aversive racism and selection
decisions: 1989 and 1999. Psychological Science, 11, 315-319.

Dunning, D., Leuenberger, A., & Sherman, D. A. (1995). A new look at
motivated inference: Are self-serving theories of success a product of
motivational forces? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69,
58-68.

Dutton, D. G. (1971). Reactions of restauranteurs to Blacks and Whites
violating restaurant dress requirements. Canadian Journal of Behav-
toural Science, 3, 298-302.

Eagly, A. H., & Karau, S. J. (2002). Role congruity theory of prejudice
toward female leaders. Psychological Review, 109, 573-598.

Epley, N., & Dunning, D. (2000). Feeling “holier than thou”: Are self-
serving assessments produced by errors in self or social prediction?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 861-875.

Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.

Festinger, L. (1964). Conflict, decision, and dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.

Fiske, S. T. (1998). Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination. In D. T.
Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social
psychology (Ath ed., pp. 357-414). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Fiske, S. T., & Neuberg, S. L. (1990). A continuum model of impression
formation from category-based to individuating processes: Influences of
information and motivation on attention and interpretation. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 23, pp.
1-74). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Freud, A. (1936). The ego and the mechanisms of defense. New York:
International Universities Press.

Freud, S. (1962). The neuro-psychoses of defense. In J. Strachey (Ed. and
Trans.), The standard edition of the complete works of Sigmund Freud
(Vol. 3, pp. 45-61). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published
1894)

Gaertner, S. L., & Dovidio, J. F. (1986). The aversive form of racism. In
J. F. Dovidio & S. L. Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice, discrimination, and
racism (pp. 61-89). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.

Goethals, G. R. (1986). Fabricating and ignoring social reality: Self-
serving estimates of consensus. In J. M. Olson, C. P. Herman, & M. P.
Zanna (Eds.), Social comparison and relative deprivation: The Ontario
Symposium (Vol. 4, pp. 135-157). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Hodson, G., Dovidio, J. F., & Gaertner, S. L. (2002). Processes in racial
discrimination: Differential weighting of conflicting information. Per-
sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 460—471.

Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F. 3d 932 (5th Cir. 1996).

Hsee, C. K. (1996). Elastic justification: How unjustifiable factors influ-
ence judgments. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses, 66, 122-129.

Ito, T. A., & Urland, G. R. (2003). Race and gender on the brain:
Electrocortical measures of attention to the race and gender of multiply
categorizable individuals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
85, 616-626.

James, E. H., Brief, A. P., Dietz, J., & Cohen, R. R. (2001). Prejudice
matters: Understanding the reactions of Whites to affirmative action
programs targeted to benefit Blacks. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86,
1120-1128.

Kelman, H. C. (2001). Reflections on social and psychological processes of
legitimization and delegitimization. In J. T. Jost & B. Major (Eds.), The
psychology of legitimacy: Emerging perspectives on ideology, justice,
and intergroup relations (pp. 54-73). New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Kravitz, D. A. (1995). Attitudes toward affirmative action plans directed at
Blacks: Effects of plan and individual differences. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 25, 2192-2220.

Kruglanski, A. W. (1989a). Lay epistemics and human knowledge: Cog-
nitive and motivational biases. New York: Plenum.

Kruglanski, A. W. (1989b). The psychology of being “right”: The problem
of accuracy in social perception and cognition. Psychological Bulletin,
106, 395-409.

Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bul-
letin, 108, 480-498.

Lerner, J. S., & Tetlock, P. E. (1999). Accounting for the effects of
accountability. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 255-275.

Lord, C. G., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased assimilation and
attitude polarization: The effects of prior theories on subsequently con-
sidered evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37,
2098-2109.

Mather, M., Shafir, E., & Johnson, M. K. (2000). Misremembrance of
options past: Source monitoring and choice. Psychological Science, 11,
132-138.

Monin, B., & Miller, D. T. (2001). Moral credentials and the expression of
prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 33-43.
Monin, B., & Norton, M. L (2003). Perceptions of a fluid consensus:
Uniqueness bias, false consensus, false polarization and pluralistic ig-
norance in a water conservation crisis. Personality and Social Psychol-

ogy Bulletin, 29, 559-567.

Norton, M. I. (2002). Moral casuistry and the justification of biased
judgment. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Princeton University.

Pelham, B. W. (1991). On confidence and consequence: The certainty and
importance of self-knowledge. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 60, 518-530.

Pelham, B. W., & Neter, E. (1995). The effect of motivation of judgment
depends on the difficulty of the judgment. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 68, 581-594.

Peterson, R. S. (1994). The role of values in predicting fairness judgments
and support of affirmative action. Journal of Social Issues, 50, 95-115.

Plant, E. A., & Devine, P. G. (1998). Internal and external motivation to
respond without prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 69, 811-832.

Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Toward an integration of cogni-
tive and motivational perspectives on social inference: A biased
hypothesis-testing model. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experi-
mental social psychology (Vol. 20, pp. 297-340). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.

Rodin, M. J., Price, J. M., Bryson, J. B., & Sanchez, F. J. (1990).
Asymmetry in prejudice attribution. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 26, 481-504.

Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1985). Contrast analysis. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

Schaller, M. (1992). In-group favoritism and statistical reasoning in social
inference: Implications for formation and maintenance of group stereo-
types. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 61-74.

Schein, V. E. (1973). The relationship between sex role stereotypes and
requisite management characteristics. Journal of Applied Psychology,
57, 95-100.

Schein, V. E. (1975). Relationships between sex role stereotypes and
requisite management characteristics among female managers. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 60, 340-344.

Scott, M. B., & Lyman, S. M. (1968). Accounts. American Sociological
Review, 33, 46-62.

Shafir, E., Simonson, L, & Tversky, A. (1993). Reason-based choice.
Cognition, 49, 11-36.

Simonson, L, & Staw, B. M. (1992). Deescalation strategies: A comparison
of techniques for reducing commitment to losing courses of action.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 419-426.

Slovic, P. (1975). Choice between equally valued alternatives. Journal of
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CASUISTRY 831

Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 1,
280-287.

Sniderman, P. M., & Piazza, T. (1993). The scar of race. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press.

Snyder, M. L., Kleck, R. E., Strenta, A., & Mentzer, S. J. (1979). Avoid-
ance of the handicapped: An attributional ambiguity analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 2297-2306.

Sommers, S. R., & Norton, M. L (2004). Everyday beliefs about racists:
Lay theories of what constitutes racism (and what doesn’t). Manuscript
submitted for publication.

Son Hing, L. S., Bobocel, D. R., & Zanna, M. P. (2002). Meritocracy and
opposition to affirmative action: Making concessions in the face of
discrimination. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 493—
509.

Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the
integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261-302). New York: Academic Press.

Steele, S. (1990). The content of our character. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.

Swann, W. B., Stein-Seroussi, A., & Giesler, R. B. (1992). Why people
self-verify. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 392-401.

Swim, J. K., & Miller, D. L. (1999). White guilt: Its antecedents and
consequences for attitudes toward affirmative action. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 500-514.

Tetlock, P. E. (1992). The impact of accountability on judgment and
choice: Toward a social contingency model. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 25, pp. 331-376).
New York: Academic Press.

Tetlock, P. E., Kristel, O. V., Elson, S. B., Green, M. C., & Lerner, J. S.
(2000). The psychology of the unthinkable: Taboo trade-offs, forbidden
base rates, and heretical counterfactuals. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 78, 853-870.

Tetlock, P. E., & Manstead, A. S. (1985). Impression management versus
intrapsychic explanations in social psychology: A useful dichotomy?
Psychological Review, 92, 59-77.

Title VIL of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. Sec. 2000c-(a)(1)
(1964).

Tsang, J. (2002). Moral rationalization and the integration of situational
factors and psychological processes in immoral behavior. Review of
General Psychology, 6, 25-50.

Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psycho-
logical Review, 79, 281-299.

Wegener, D. T., & Petty, R. E. (1995). Flexible correction processes in
social judgment: The role of naive theories in corrections for perceived
bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 36-51.

Wilson, T. D., Lindsey, S., & Schooler, T. Y. (2000). A model of dual
attitudes. Psychological Review, 107, 101-126.

Yzerbyt, V. Y., Schadron, G., Leyens, J. P., & Rocher, S. (1994). Social
judgeability: The impact of meta-informational cues on the use of
stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 48-55.

Received January 27, 2004
Revision received July 8, 2004
Accepted July 9, 2004 m

 

and specialty divisions.

 

Low Publication Prices for APA Members and Affiliates

Keeping you up-to-date. All APA Fellows, Members, Associates, and Student Affiliates
receive—as part of their annual dues—subscriptions to the American Psychologist and
APA Monitor. High School Teacher and International Affiliates receive subscriptions to
the APA Monitor, and they may subscribe to the American Psychologist at a significantly
reduced rate. In addition, all Members and Student Affiliates are eligible for savings of up
to 60% (plus a journal credit) on all other APA journals, as well as significant discounts on
subscriptions from cooperating societies and publishers (e.g., the American Association for
Counseling and Development, Academic Press, and Human Sciences Press).

Essential resources. APA members and affiliates receive special rates for purchases of
APA books, including the Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association,
and on dozens of new topical books each year.

Other benefits of membership. Membership in APA also provides eligibility for

competitive insurance plans, continuing education programs, reduced APA convention fees,

More information. Write to American Psychological Association, Membership Services,
750 First Street, NE. Washington, DC 20002-4242.

 

 
