 

HEINONLINE

DATE DOWNLOADED: Tue Nov 22 07:54:17 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Daria Roithmayr, Deconstructing the Distinction between Bias and Merit, 10 LA RAZA
L.J. 363 (1998).

ALWD 7th ed.
Daria Roithmayr, Deconstructing the Distinction between Bias and Merit, 10 La Raza
LJ. 363 (1998).

APA 7th ed.
Roithmayr, D. (1998). Deconstructing the distinction between bias and merit. La Raza
Law Journal, 10(1), 363-422.

Chicago 17th ed.
Daria Roithmayr, "Deconstructing the Distinction between Bias and Merit," La Raza Law
Journal 10, no. 1 (Spring 1998): 363-422

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Daria Roithmayr, "Deconstructing the Distinction between Bias and Merit" (1998) 10:1
La Raza LJ 363.

AGLC 4th ed.
Daria Roithmayr, ‘Deconstructing the Distinction between Bias and Merit’ (1998) 10(1)
La Raza Law Journal 363

MLA 9th ed.
Roithmayr, Daria. "Deconstructing the Distinction between Bias and Merit." La Raza
Law Journal, vol. 10, no. 1, Spring 1998, pp. 363-422. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Daria Roithmayr, ‘Deconstructing the Distinction between Bias and Merit’ (1998) 10 La
Raza LJ 363

Provided by:
Younes & Soraya Nazarian Library, University of Haifa

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline’s Terms and
Conditions of the license agreement available at
htips.//heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

-- To obtain permission to use this article beyond the scope of your license, please use:

Copyright Information
Deconstructing the Distinction
Between Bias and Merit

Daria Roithmayrt

In this article Professor Roithmayr attempts to develop in the context
of law school admissions a theoretical argument from deconstruction to
support the radical critique of merit. The radical critique, espoused
primarily by Critical Race Theorists and radical feminists, argues that
merit standards disproportionately exclude white women and people of
color because merit standards were developed by dominant social
groups, in ways that have disproportionately benefited their descen-
dants. Using a critical history of law school admission standards, as
well as a deconstructive reading of a defense of merit offered by
Professors Daniel Farber and Suzanna Sherry, Professor Roithmayr
deconstructs the distinction between merit standards and social bias,
to argue that merit standards necessarily embody race-conscious
social preferences existing at the time the standards were developed.
Reviewing the history of law school admissions standards, she demon-
strates that choices about what constitutes socially valuable ability in
the legal profession and legal education historically were made in the
context of the profession’s explicitly race-conscious effort to exclude
immigrants and people of color. Professor Roithmayr then proposes to
use deconstructive and critical historical insights about merit and bias
to modify Title VI doctrine to reflect the fact that merit standards histori-
cally have depended on and deferred to race-conscious social bias.

The mind funnels of Harvard and Yale are called standards.
Standards are concrete monuments to socially accepted

 

Copyright © 1997 California Law Review, Inc.

t+ Associate Professor of Law, University of Illinois College of the Law. Special thanks to
Steve Ross, David Jacobsen, Russell Korobkin and participants in the Critical Race Theory Workshop
panel on works-in-progress for extensive and invaluable comments. All errors, of course, are the
author's,

1449

363
364 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL (Vol. 10:363

1450 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

subjective preference. Standards are like paths picked through
fields of equanimity, worn into hard wide roads over time, used
always because of collective habit, expectation and convenience.
The pleasures and perils of picking one’s own path through the
field are soon forgotten; the logic or illogic of the course of the
road is soon rationalized by the mere fact of the road.

—Patricia A. Williams'

The meritocratic ideal is that positions in society should be based
on the abilities and achievements of the individual rather than on
characteristics such as family background, race, religion, or
wealth. This ideal requires that merit be objective in the sense of
being definable without reference to those personal characteris-
tics.

—Daniel A. Farber and Suzanna Sherry’

The results from Proposition 209 are finally in and the numbers
are quite dramatic. Administrators on law school campuses in the
University of California system have released the demographic profiles
of the first class of students admitted and enrolled under the edicts of
Proposition 209, which precludes the use of race in educational admis-
sions decisions. Not surprisingly, the number of Latino/a and African-
American students enrolled in U.C. law schools had dropped sharply.’

 

1. Patricia A. WILLIAMS, THE ALCHEMY OF RACE AND RIGHTS 99 (1991),

2. Dante. A. FARBER & SUZANNA SHERRY, BEYOND ALL REASON: THE RADICAL ASSAULT
ON TRUTH IN AMERICAN Law (1997) [hereinafter FARBER & SHERRY, BEYOND ALL REASON]; see
also Daniel Farber and Suzanna Sherry, Is the Radical Critique of Merit Anti-Semitic?, 83 Cauir, L.
Rev. 853, 858 (1995) [hereinafter Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit).

3. The following figures reflect a comparison between admissions and enrollment figures for
1996 (under admissions policies that could consider race as a factor) versus 1997 (under new
admissions policies that prohibited considering race as a factor). At the University of California-
Davis School of Law, admissions for Latinos/as dropped from 8.28% (69) to 6.21% (50); for African
Americans, admissions dropped from 3.24% (27) to 2.49% (20). In a class of 172 enrolled, 6 (3.48%)
were Latinos/as and 5 (2.9%) were African American. Letter from Sharon Pinkney, Director of
Admissions at the University of California-Davis, to Joe Jaramillo, MALDEF, September 5, 1997 (on
file with author).

At the University of California-Los Angeles School of Law, admissions for Latinos/as dropped
from 10.7% (108) to 7.34% (74); for African-Americans, admissions dropped sharply from 10.3%
(104) to 2.08% (21). Enrollments for Latinos/as dropped from 14.65% (45) to 10.23% (39); for
African Americans, enroliment dropped from 6.2% (19) to 2.62% (10). Chart, UCLA School of Law
Statistics 1980-97, September 4, 1997 (on file with the author).

At the University of Califomia-Berkeley School of Law (Boalt Hall), admissions for Latinos/as
were cut almost in half from 9.6% (78) to 4.9% (39); for African-Americans, admissions dropped
sharply from 9.2% (75) to 1.8% (14). Seven Latinos/as currently enrolled this year (2.88% of new
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 365

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1451

But even the most prescient of commentators could not have predicted
that the University of California-Berkeley School of Law (Boalt Hall)
would not enroll a single African-American student admitted for the
1997-1998 year.’

Reaction to the numbers has been mixed. Supporters of affirmative
action point out the obvious, that the new admissions policy has dispro-
portionately excluded people of color from University of California and
Texas law schools, and fear that the new admissions programs will reseg-
regate these institutions.’ Opponents of affirmative action argue that the
new policy is appropriately meritocratic and race-neutral, and that the
policy’s disproportionate impact on applicants of color can be ex-
plained by poor schooling or cultural differences.’ Those explanations
notwithstanding, the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Civil
Rights recently has agreed to investigate whether the SP-1 admissions
process, as the new process is called, violates Title VI, which prohibits
discrimination on the basis of race or ethnicity in higher education.’

In many ways, what is at stake in the California affirmative action
debate is not just quibbling over the fate of the so-called “talented
tenth.” Rather, the controversy focuses on a concept at the heart of
contemporary race politics in the idea that merit and bias are opposites,
and that merit is a race-neutral concept, while bias is race-conscious. As

 

enrollees) (seven deferred from the previous year). Letter from Edward Tom, Director of
Admissions, Boalt Hall to Joe Jaramillo, MALDEF, August 25, 1997 (on file with the author).

At the University of California-Hastings School of Law, admissions for Latinos/as dropped from
9.5% (169) to 6.3% (81). For African Americans, admissions dropped from 5.2% (92) to 3.0% (38).
Enrollments for Latinos/as dropped from 6.7% (43) to 6.0% (19), and for African Americans from
5.3% (26) to 2.8% (9). Letter from Angele Khachadour, Office of the General Counsel, UC-Hastings
Law School to Joe Jaramillo, MALDEF, September 3, 1997 (on file with author).

4. See Letter from Edward Tom, supra note 3. Only one African-American student, Eric
Brooks, who had been admitted the previous year, but had deferred enrollment for a year, was
enrolled for the 1997-98 academic year. See id.

5. Freshman Fallout, Houston Chronicle, August 24, 1997 at 1 (Robert Berdahl, speculating
that Texas public schools enrolled fewer minorities because of fears of resegregation).

6. According to University of Texas law professor Lino Graglia, “Black and Hispanic people
do not do as well on standardized tests and come from cultures in which ‘failure is not looked upon
with disgrace..." UT Group Praises Hopwood Ruling, AUSTIN-AMERICAN STATESMAN, September
11, 1997 at B1. Law school enrollments in Texas dropped significantly after Attorney General Dan
Morales interpreted the Fifth Circuit’s decision in Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F.3d 932 (5th Cir. 1996), to
bar affirmative action and retention programs in law schools. In particular, enrollments at Texas
public law schools dropped by the following percentage points for the groups listed: Black-23%;
Latino-19%; Asian-24%; American-Indians-53%. Law, Medical Schools Hunting For Minorities,
AUSTIN AMERICAN STATESMAN, October 17, 1997 at Cl.

7. UC Law Schools Face Discrimination Investigation, Los ANGELES Times, July 15, 1997 at
A3. Title VI, 42 U.S.C. section 2000¢d (1994) (Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964) [hereinafter
“Title VI"), prohibits discrimination on the basis of race in federally funded education programs.
366 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1452 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

is reflected in the opening citation, the conventional understanding of
Merit assumes that merit standards measure an individual’s potential
ability to produce something of social value—good lawyering, or high
performance in law school, for example—by assessing certain traits,
qualities, or skills that reflect potential ability. Law schools admit stu-
dents on the basis of their grades and LSAT scores—on their
“merits”—-because admissions committees think that a high score on
the LSAT and a high GPA reflect an applicant’s potential ability to
achieve and produce social value in legal education and the legal pro-
fession.

In contrast, bias is understood as the direct opposite of merit.
Biased selection standards—those based on race, ethnicity, family con-
nections, social status—are condemned because society does not think
that these factors rationally correlate to the ability to produce value in
legal education or the legal profession. To the extent that statistical
analysis might demonstrate some correlation between race and success
in law schools, scholars search for some external and theoretically race-
neutral factor—e.g., poor schooling—to explain the correlation. But
they begin with the presumption that the standards by which they meas-
ure merit are race-neutral, and that merit itself—the ability to produce
something of social value—is race-neutral as well. Within that frame-
work of analysis, policy-makers seek to eliminate racism by rooting out
bias and ensuring that opportunities are distributed on the race-neutral
basis of pure merit standards.

And then comes the radical critique of merit, which literally stands
the distinction between merit and bias on its head. The radical critique,
articulated primarily by critical race theorists and some radical feminist
scholars, argues that merit standards disproportionately exclude people
of color and women because the standards historically have been devel-
oped by members of dominant groups in ways that end up favoring
them. Scholars like Patricia Williams have argued that merit standards
are simply socially acceptable subjective preferences, developed by
members of social groups who were in power at the relevant time and
place in history, and whose descendants continue to disproportionately
benefit from decisions made under those standards.’ We have forgotten
or suppressed the standards’ subjective history, according to Williams,
and now represent the standards to be ahistorical, objective measures of
ability. Having separated the standards from their history, we do not
contemplate the notion that what constitutes ability itself is subjective

 

8. WILLIAMS, supra note 1, at 99. See alse infra note 9.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 367

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1453

and constructed under particular historical circumstances by particular
social groups.

Although several scholars have sketched the outlines of the radical
critique of merit,’ those outlines have been more general in nature. This
article attempts to develop more fully a deconstructive theoretical argu-
ment in support of the radical critique of merit, using a critical history
of law school admissions to illustrate that merit standards are necessarily
the effect of subjective, social and contingent race-conscious prefer-
ences for particular kinds of abilities.

The Article takes as its point of critical departure the objectivist
conception of merit defended by Professors Daniel Farber and Suzanna
Sherry in their latest work. In their book Beyond All Reason: The
Radical Assault on Truth in American Law, Farber and Sherry continue
their long-standing defense of the conventional notion that merit stan-
dards, when properly applied, provide some measure of excellence that
is objective and independent of ideology or culture.

Farber and Sherry do not defend merit on theoretical grounds.
Rather, they start with the empirical claim that Jews and some Asian
groups have had disproportionate success under current meritocratic
systems."° Armed with this assumption, they level two political objections
to the radical critique. First, they argue that radical critics cannot recon-
cile the success of Jews and Asian Americans with the argument that
merit standards were constructed to exclude people of color.'' Second,
they contend that the radical critique unfairly characterizes the successes
of Jews and Asian Americans as undeserved, and seeks to deprive mem-
bers of those groups of their hard-won successes.’* The better argument,
say the authors, is that Jews and some Asian-American groups have suc-
ceeded because they possess an objective quality called “merit” that is

 

9. See Richard Delgado, Rodrigo’s Tenth Chronicle: Merit and Affirmative Action, 83 Geo LJ.
1711 (1995) [hereinafter Delgado, Rodrigo’s Tenth Chronicle], Richard Delgado, Rodrigo's
Chronicle, 101 Yate LJ. 1357, 1364 (1992); Robert L. Hayman, Jr. & Nancy Levit, The Tales of
White Folk: Doctrine, Narrative and the Reconstruction of Racial Reality, 84 CauiF. L. REv, 377, 403
(1996); Duncan Kennedy, A Cultural Pluralist Case for Affirmative Action in Legal Academia, 1990
Duxe LJ. 705 (1990) [hereinafter A Culturally Pluralist Case]; Gary Peller, Race Consciousness,
1990 Duke LJ. 758, 803-807 (1990); Williams, supra note 1, at 104-110.

10. See Farper & SHerry, BEYOND ALL REASON, supra note 2 at 57-58.

Vi. See id. at 10 (‘If there is no such thing as objective merit, what explains the success of Jews
and Asian Americans, both of whom, like Blacks, have been victims of discrimination by white
Gentile America?”)

12. See id. at 10-11 (“The radical theories inescapably imply that Jews and Asians [sic] enjoy
an unfair share of wealth and status. . . .In short, we believe that radical multiculturalism implies that
Jews and Asian Americans are unjustly favored in the social distribution of goods.”)
368 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1454 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

independent of race or ethnicity.* To explain why other people of color
have failed to achieve comparable success, Farber and Sherry argue that
the most likely explanation (given that it disturbs status quo assumptions
the least) is that dominant groups have applied objectively valid merit
standards to those groups in a discriminatory manner.’

Although the authors studiously avoid metaphysical discussions
about the existence of “objective merit,” their work nevertheless relies
on a conventional theoretical distinction between merit and bias.
According to the authors’ logic, society should prefer merit standards
because they efficiently select for the ability to create social value, and
therefore are logically associated with justice, rationality, objectivity and
color-blindness. In contrast, society should disfavor “biased” criteria
such as race, wealth or family connections, because those criteria derive
from status, and are associated with subjectivity, irrationality and race-
consciousness."

To be sure, Farber and Sherry’s distinction between merit and bias
comports with conventional mainstream understandings of why merit
standards should be preferred over standards that are biased. But the
conventional distinction between merit and bias ignores the way in
which ideas about what constitutes value in a particular institutional set-
ting, and what constitutes an appropriate way to measure for the poten-
tial to create that value, are necessarily contingent, subjective, and
historically specific ideas.

This Article deconstructs the authors’ conceptual opposition be-
tween merit and bias to make three related arguments. First, merit stan-
dards necessarily defer to and depend on the very ideas that define
social bias and distinguish it from merit. For merit standards to measure
the ability to create social value, as they are said to do, the standards
must necessarily defer to social preferences about what constitutes social
value, and how that value is produced. These preferences are necessarily
subjective and race-conscious; they are developed in a historically con-
tingent social context and are authored by members of groups who have

 

13. See id. at 57, 59 (“There is no doubt that Jews and Asians [sic], considered as groups, have
achieved extraordinary success in our society, on average outperforming white gentiles on many
measures of success.” “If objective merit is wholly irrelevant, it is difficult to account for Jewish or
Asian [sic] success.”’)

14. See id. at 55, 56 (‘Denouncing the concept of merit altogether is much more satisfying than
simply charging that objective standards of merit are applied in a discriminatory fashion, as
unfortunately they sometimes are.” “[The argument that current discrimination is the cause of
differential success rates between blacks and whites] also suggests that what blacks—and by
extension other disadvantaged groups—need to do is to continue battling discrimination.”).

15. See id. at 54.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 369

1997) BIAS AND MERIT 1455

enough social power—which historically has been based in part on their
race and ethnicity—to define what counts as social value. Thus, merit
standards necessarily reinscribe the very qualities that Farber and Sherry
associate with bias—subjectivity, nonrationality, race-consciousness and
social status. In some meaningful sense, then, merit standards can be
redescribed as a form of bias that has come to be socially accepted.

This Article uses the example of law school admissions to illustrate
that choices about social value in the legal profession and education—
and the merit standards designed to promote that social value—
historically have been tied to the social status of professional leaders
and, in this case, to the profession’s desire to bar entry to immigrants
and people of color. In particular, choices about the way law is prac-
ticed, and more specifically about the way law is taught, were made in
the context of the profession’s explicit effort to stem the tide of immi-
grants and Black men who sought to become lawyers in the early 1900s.
Those choices still govern much of legal practice and education today.

Second, the Article suggests that, because determining what consti-
tutes “social value” in any particular context is necessarily an histori-
cally-specific, contingent phenomenon, Farber and Sherry might better
explain the disproportionate success of Jews and some Asian-American
groups by conducting a critical historical inquiry. Given the historical
differences between groups, it would be more useful to determine the
conditions under which these groups achieved their success, rather than
reasoning abstractly and ahistorically about why each group has or has
not succeeded.

Finally, the Article proposes that the deconstructivist interpretation
of merit be put to practical use. Using deconstructivist insights in con-
junction with the critical history of law school admissions criteria, liti-
gators might be able to argue that current merit standards in the SP-1
law school admissions process in the University of California system
violate Title VI (which precludes discrimination in educational institu-
tions that receive federal money), because these standards historically
were developed in the context of racial exclusion, and because the stan-
dards as they are currently operated serve to disproportionately exclude
Latinos/as and African Americans. At the very least, this argument based
on history and statistics should shift the burden of proof to proponents
of merit standards, who should have to prove that the standards are
“pure”—that is, they were not adopted or developed in a context where
people of color were routinely excluded, or they do not disproportion-
ately affect people of color.
370 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1456 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

Part I of this Article attempts to provide a primer on the method of
deconstructive practice, in order to translate and make accessible con-
cepts that are relevant to this project. This section briefly traces the theo-
retical evolution of deconstructive practice from structuralism and post-
structuralism. It demonstrates, using an example of deconstructive rede-
scription, that concepts like merit or reason are rhetorical categories that
are historically created in the context of particular social institutions,
and are not objectively grounded in “true” or “real” accounts of the
way things really are.

Part II applies this deconstructive method to the passage in Farber
and Sherry’s text in which the authors attempt to justify the conven-
tional preference for merit by contrasting it to bias. In particular, the
deconstructive reading of the authors’ defense of merit demonstrates
that “merit” standards necessarily and inevitably defer to arbitrary,
race-conscious, subjective and historically contingent preferences—i.e.,
to socially acceptable biases—about what constitutes social value. The
Article illustrates this argument by showing how law school admissions
standards deferred to and relied upon subjective, historically and so-
cially contingent choices, made by leaders of the profession—whose
status was based in large part on race—in the context of a concerted ef-
fort by the profession to keep immigrants and Blacks out of practice
and legal education. To the extent that law school admissions standards
were developed in the context of racial exclusion, and perhaps for the
explicit purpose of racial exclusion, it should come as no surprise that
these standards continue to exclude disproportionately on the basis of
race and ethnicity.

This critical history of law school admissions demonstrates the lim-
its of the objectivist defense of merit, which purports to rely on reason
and not politics for its justification. By demonstrating the indeterminacy
of the distinction between merit and bias, deconstruction clears the way
for an explicitly political discussion about how we want to distribute op-
portunity in educational institutions and the workplace.

Part III explores several additional implications of the deconstruc-
tive reading for Farber and Sherry’s defense of merit. First, the section
suggests that, rather than drawing “logical” conclusions about Jewish
and Asian-American success, Farber and Sherry might find it more use-
ful to conduct a critical historical inquiry into the matter. For example,
an historical inquiry might reveal, as the authors themselves have sug-
gested, that some Asian-American groups and Jews have overcome some
forms of historical discrimination by using their own cultural capital
to beat the dominant discourse at its own “merit” game. Perhaps these
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 371

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1457

groups have taken advantage of their own independently developed
cultural emphasis on formal education in certain professions to excel at
the kind of merit valued by conventional standards. In any event, ahis-
torical comparisons and abstract analyses are problematic, given that
merit is necessarily a historically and culturally contingent assessment.

More pragmatically, the section proposes that litigators deliberately
and strategically make use of deconstructive insights into merit and bias
to argue under Title VI that SP-1 admissions standards are both histori-
cally and currently discriminatory. This section proposes a new hybrid
category of claim under anti-discrimination law, an “intentional im-
pact” category, which combines elements of intentional discrimination
with elements of disproportionate impact doctrine. Under “intentional
impact” claims, plaintiffs could mount a prima facie case upon showing
that a merit selection process can be traced in some way to historical
discrimination (even if that discrimination is not institution-specific), in
conjunction with a showing that the procedure currently disproportion-
ately excludes applicants of color. Defenders of a selection process like
SP-1 would then have to prove either that the standards were not devel-
oped in the context of early efforts by legal institutions to exclude ap-
plicants of color from the bar or that they have no disproportionate
impact on protected groups.

Finally, Part [V disputes the author’s charge that the radical cri-
tique is nihilistic. This section argues that, to the contrary, deconstruc-
tion deploys rigorously analytical reasoning to expose the limits of that
rationality, and to clear the way for a necessarily political discussion on
how society should distribute its resources. Indeed, the radical critique is
nihilist only when one already accepts the need for and the possibility
of transcendent and uncontroversial criteria to choose between compet-
ing accounts of merit.

J
A PRIMER ON DECONSTRUCTIVE PRACTICE

A. The Deconstructive Turn

Deconstructive practice proceeds from the premise that language
does not neutrally and objectively represent objects that are “out there”
in reality. Instead, deconstructivists point out that our knowledge of re-
ality is inextricably bound up with, and shaped by, language or other
372 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1458 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

practices that we use to represent reality." According to Jacques
Derrida,” most conventional Western intellectual traditions rely on a
“metaphysics of presence”—the idea that objects in the real world and
ideas inside someone’s head are actually present in some sort of exis-
tentially meaningful way that can be described as real and “true.”™
These “logocentric” traditions assume that objects and consciousness
are “present” and exist independently of the language we use to de-
scribe them.”

Under this logocentric view of language, words derive their
meaning from a one-to-one correspondence with naturally existing ob-
jects or ideas. Words merely reflect these objects or ideas “as they really
are,” and our understanding of the objects and ideas is prior to, and
is not affected or shaped by, process of representation itself.”° For ex-
ample, the word “tree” is a sign that substitutes for the “real thing”—
the physical arboreal entity—and the word reflects the thing perfectly,

 

16. To trace the history of deconstructive practice is to pretend that deconstruction fits into
determinate categories by way of some coherent, logical worked-out theory, a notion that is of course
antithetical to the entire project of post-structuralism. In particular, “[t]o present ‘deconstruction’ as
if it were a method, a system or a settled body of ideas, would be to falsify its nature and lay oneself
open to charges of reductive misunderstanding.” CHRISTOPHER NORRIS, DECONSTRUCTION: THEORY
AND PRACTICE 1 (1991). However reductive and oversimplified, these accounts nevertheless may be
of some use to the reader.

17. Widely acknowledged as the father of deconstruction, Jacques Derrida’s writings do not fit
neatly within any of the traditional categories of academic disciplines. His professional training was
in philosophy at the Ecole Normale Superieure in Paris. His ideas have influenced many other fields
outside philosophy, including literary theory, linguistics, sociology, psychoanalysis and feminist
studies. See RICHARD KEARNEY & MARIA RAINWATER, THE CONTINENTAL PHILOSOPHY READER
289, 438 (1996); Norris, supra note 16, at 18.

The section relies not only on Derrida’s work but also on secondary analysis of Derrida, namely
the work of Gayatri Spivak, Jonathan Culler and Christopher Norris. See Translator’s Preface to
JONATHAN CULLER, ON DECONSTRUCTION: THEORY AND CRITICISM AFTER STRUCTURALISM
(1982). See generally JacquES DERRIDA, OF GRAMMATOLOGY (Gayatri Spivak trans., 1976),
Norris, supra note 16.

18. See CULLER, supra note 17, at 92-94. In Derrida’s words, the logocentric “metaphysic of
presence” might be described as “the determination through history of the meaning of being in
general as  presence...[e.g.,] presence of the object to sight...presence as
substance/essence/existence ... temporal presence as the point of the now or the instant... self
presence of the cogito, consciousness, subjectivity, co-presence of the self and the other...” /d. at
92-93 (citing DERRIDA, supra note 17, at 23).

19. Under the logocentric view, “[Hanguage was not understood to create meaning, but rather
to operate as a tool to uncover and manipulate a concealed, but already known or knowable, order.
The content of this order was neither altered by, nor contingent upon, the mediation of the encounter
with language itself.” Thomas C. Heller, Structuralism and Critique, 36 Stan. L. Rev. 127, 139
(1984),

20, See id. at 134-35. “[BJoth world and will (consciousness) have been independent of, and
prior to, language.” /d. at 138.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 373

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1459

without any interference or shaping of our knowledge about the tree
from the language system we use to represent it.

In contrast, structuralism argues that “our knowledge of the world
is inextricably shaped and conditioned by the language that serves to
represent it.”?! Under the structuralist view of language, words or other
representational “signs” do not get their meaning from a correspon-
dence to real objects in the world or in human consciousness. Rather,
the meaning of a term comes from its structural relationships of differ-
ence or similarity to other terms or codes in a representational system.”
For example, the word “tree” acquires its meaning from its difference
from words like “sky,” “sun” or “ground,” and from its similarity
or organizational relationship’ to words like “bush,” “twig” and
“arbor.” Moreover, “tree” only makes sense as part of a scientific
naming system that organizes plants into separate categories based on
whether they have woody stems, and whether they grow to a certain
height, and so on.

These structural relationships of difference and sameness not only
create the categories that we use to express what we perceive, but also
shape the process of perception itself. According to Saussure,”
“[mJeanings are bound up...in a system of relationship and differ-
ence that effectively determines our habits of thoughts and percep-
tion.” It is not possible to say whether the chaotic phenomena that
constitute the world “out there” is “naturally” divided up into the dis-
crete perceptual categories into which we have organized them. We
simply cannot know our physical world without already having shaped
our perceptions to correspond with the categories of knowledge and

 

21. Norris, supra note 16, at 4. Structuralism first appeared in linguistics, and then moved
through anthropology and literary criticism, but was quickly overtaken in the U.S. by post-
structuralism in literary criticism. See Peter Schanck, Understanding Postmodern Thought and Its
implications For Statutory Interpretation, 65 S. Cau. L. Rev. 2505, 2520 (1992).

22. “Meaning, in this view, arises solely from formal relations between signs and not directly
from any substance in the signs themselves....(Meaning] must originate in the discovery of
similarity and difference within a system of discrete linguistic units.” Heller, supra note 19, at 141-42,

23. ‘“{The] most precise characteristic is [it is) what the others are not.” FERDINAND DE
SAUSSURE, COURSE IN GENERAL Lincuistics 117 (W. Baskin trans., 1959). See also Gary Peller,
The Metaphysics of American Law, 73 Car. L, Rev. 1151, 1165 (1984) (“The meaning of ‘tree’ is
generated through the socially created system for dividing things in the world. Tree is contrasted with
bush, sky, supper, etc.”).

24. Saussure defines “associative relations” as structural associations that are “part of the inner
storehouse that makes up [linguistic] relations.” /d. at 123.

25. Structuralism was largely the work of Ferdinand de Saussure, a Swiss linguist who sought to
scientifically catalog the structural relationships within language. For a brief introduction to Saussure
and his work, see KEARNEY & RAINWATER, supra note 17, at 289.

26. NORRIS, supra note 16, at 4. See also Peller, supra note 23, at 1165.
374 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1460 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

perception created by language. We see a tree as separate from the earth
and sky and ground, because the way in which “tree” fits into our lan-
guage has created that separation, marking as more relevant the borders
between those objects, and less relevant other borders contained within
and outside those objects. Thus, our knowledge of reality is inevitably
bound up with linguistic conventions that enable us to organize and
classify—‘“[w]hat creates interest in, gives significance to, and permits
knowledge of such a set of events is the reduction of any particular
event to its order within the system of differentiations.””’ According to
the structuralists, then, language does not reflect reality. Instead, reality
reflects language, because our knowledge of reality is created by the
way in which language carves reality up and organizes it.

In applying structuralism to literary theory, structuralists engage in
a precise and tedious dissection of a text, to discover its inherent struc-
tural features, and then to explain how meaning arises from those
structural features.* Not surprisingly, structuralists find the same kinds
of structural relationships in all manner of texts, regardless of the
author, culture or historical period. Indeed, structuralists see structural
relationships as universal, perhaps programmed innately into human
‘consciousness and reflecting the nature of human intelligence.” Some
structuralists imagine structures as disembodied entities, arguing that
they “think themselves through” the author and reader.” Disembodied
entities notwithstanding, structuralism attempts to bring scientific rigor
to linguistics and literary criticism by describing language as a set of
relationships that linguists can study scientifically via “semiology,” the
study of linguistic signs and what they signify.”

Post-structuralism turns the structuralist critique upon itself, in
some sense using the master’s tools to dismantle the master’s house.
According to post-structuralists, structures and linguistic organization
cannot serve as an anchor for meaning, because stmictural relation~
ships and linguistic categories are themselves already the products of

 

27, Heller, supra note 19, at 142,

28. See CuLrer, supra note 17, at 32 (“The attempt to describe structures and codes
responsible for the production of meaning focuses attention on the reading process and its conditions
of possibility.”).

29. Saussure contended that the general mechanism of language, which involved differentiating
operations, reflected the process of the mind. See JONATHAN CULLER, SAUSSURE 59 (1976); see
also Norris, supra note 16, at 2-3.

30. See generally Norris, supra note 16, at 2.

31. See id. For a useful description of structuralism, see Heller, supra note 19, at 131-53. See
also Vivian Grosswald Curran, Deconstruction, Structuralism, Antisemitism and the Law, 36 B.C. L.
REv. 1, 10-13 (1994).
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 375

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1461

structural relationships—pre-existing categories and operational rules—
in a particular language game or representation practice.”

For post-structuralists, the structural relationships in a particular
text are indeterminate for two reasons. First, the structural relationships
in a text are not universal or innately programmed, but are very much
the product of the context or particular language game in which the text
is situated. But, lest one think that context provides the anchor for
meaning, the number of alternative contexts or language games, and
hence interpretations, is infinite.™ It is impossible to ground meaning in
any particular representational practice or context, because one can al-
ways imagine another context that would give rise to different meanings,
or additional information about the given context or practice that could
change the resulting meaning.*

Indeed, social convention can even create new meaning by fiat, ar-
bitrarily grafting the meaning of a text onto a-new context. For exam-
ple, social convention could randomly specify that “bububu” means
“if ic does not rain I shall go out for a walk.” Thus, “total context is
unmasterable, both in principle and in practice. Meaning is context-
bound, but context has not boundaries and is limitless.””’ Accordingly,
meaning has no pre-defined categories or limitations, and a text can
produce multiple interpretations, rather than just a single correct one.*

Second, because we must use language to describe structural rela-
tionships, language games and contexts, they are also themselves the
product of structural relationships in a particular language game or
context. We describe structural relationships, contexts and language
games interpretively, identifying some elements of the structure, context

 

32. “In these ‘structuralist’ approaches, it is supposed that meaning can be determined by
specifying these underlying codes, which are seen as the significant context of the text. But
representational structures can never be conclusively determined, their relational meaning depends
on the representational practices in which they are found. Any description of the representational
structure within which meaning is generated is merely a re-presentation of the structure according to
the language of the interpreter, the way that the interpreter distinguishes relevance from
irrelevance.” Peller, supra note 23, at 1173.

33. See J.M. Balkin, Nested Oppesitions, 99 YALE LJ. 1669, 1674-75 (1990) (discussing the
dependence of structural relationships on context),

34. See CULLER, supra note 17, at 123-24.

35. See id.

36. Culler notes that context is unmasterable because it is always open to further description,
and because it is possible to graft a new context and new meaning onto an old formulation. /d. at 124.
Culler uses the cited example because Wittgenstein had argued that one could not say “bububu” and
mean “if it does not rain I shall go out for a walk.” fd.

37. Id. at 123.

38, See id.
376 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1462 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

or game as relevant, and others as irrelevant.” Accordingly, structure is
itself the product of the structural relationships in the language we use
to describe a structure. This never-ending recursive chain of structural
relationships puts beyond reach any solid ground for meaning.”
“(However far back we try to push, even when we try imagining the
‘birth’ of language and describe an orginary event that might have
produced the first structure, we discover that we must assume prior or-
ganization, prior differentiation.” Thus, neither structure, context nor
representational practice can provide a stable source for meaning.

Deconstructive practice, which is a form of post-structuralist
method, takes aim at a particular kind of structural relationship—the
ordered® binary opposition—to show that meaning is unstable and
subject to multiple interpretations and re-descriptions.” According to
Derrida, traditional Western discourse creates meaning by organizing
knowledge into structural binary oppositions, in which a pair of terms
are framed as opposites of each other, and one term enjoys a privileged
hierarchical status over the other.“ For example, conventional discourse
constructs reason and passion as opposites, where reason enjoys the pre-
ferred position while passion is relatively disfavored.

 

39. Context is “the derivative effect of the representational practice in which some elements of
social life are said to constitute the context or structure to the exclusion of other aspects.” Peller,
supra note 23, at 1224, Peller argues that the shift from authorial intent in the text to focus instead on
the context is the strand of legal realist practice that mainstream legal discourse has incorporated (via
realism and the law and economics movement), as opposed to the deconstructive strand. See id. at
1225.

40. Beyond recursive structures, theories of difference presume the existence of something
from which to differ. “Even theories like Saussure’s, with its powerful critique of logocentrism in its
concept of a purely differential system, do not escape the logocentric premises they
undermine . . . [A] theory based on difference does not escape logocentrism but finds itself appealing
to presence ... because in order to identify differences responsible for meanings one needs to treat
some meanings as if they were given, as if they were somewhere ‘present’ as a point of departure.”
CULLER, supra note 17, at 109-10,

41. Id. at 96.

42. The binary opposition is described as hierarchically ordered because social convention
ranks one of the terms as primary or preferred, and the other as a negation, a supplement, or a
derivative secondary term. For example, social convention ranks reason over passion. See JACQUES
DERRIDA, DIssEMINATION viii (Barbara Johnson trans., 1981); see also Schanck, supra note 21, at
2525,

43. “Deconstruction is avowedly ‘post-structuralist’ in its refusal to accept the idea of structure
as in any sense given or objectively ‘there’ in the text.” NorRIs, supra note 16, at 3.

44, Western thought “has always been structured in terms of dichotomies or polarities ... The
second term in each pair is considered the negative, corrupt, undesirable version of the first, a fall
away from it...[The two terms] are not simply opposed in their meanings, but are arranged in a
hierarchical order which gives the first term priority.” DERRIDA, supra note 42, at viii.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 377

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1463

In what appears to be a structuralist move, Derrida argues that in a
binary opposition, each term derives its conventionally understood
meaning by way of its difference from its opposite term.“ In our exam-
ple, reason often is defined by referring to that which it is not—passion,
emotion or desire. Moreover, even relationships of similarity can be re-
duced to structural difference, because terms that are similar ultimately
also gain their meaning from that which they are not.

Where Derrida “breaks new ground,” however, is in demonstrating
that relationships of difference “inevitably shade” into relationships of
deference and dependence.* Derrida contends that each term acquires
its fundamental meaning by simultaneously differing from, and de-
pending on and deferring to, the qualities possessed by its opposite.”

In the case of reason/passion, suppose that a certain text distin-
guished reason from passion on the grounds that reason produces order
and passion produces disorder or violence. A deconstructivist reading
reverses or flips the terms within the hierarchy, to show that for reason
to maintain order, it necessarily must defer to, and/or rely upon, the
violent and coercive force associated with passion. Indeed, as is detailed
in the next section at some length, reason can be redescribed as the pas-
sion to repress passion. If reason necessarily possesses passion’s char-
acteristic use of coercive violence to maintain order, then the text’s
argument that we should prefer reason over passion has run aground on
its own terms.”

Similarly, passion can be redescribed as the logical reason to prefer
reason over passion—if we value order over violence, then rationally we
should prefer reason. Accordingly, if reason can be seen to depend on
passion, and passion is understood as depending on reason, then the
terms defer to one another even as they oppose each other. Their rela-
tion of simultaneous difference and dependence is rhetorical and illogi-
cal rather than “real” and “rational.”

Under this deconstructionist view, neither of the two terms in an
opposition can serve as the source of meaning, because each term

 

45. “The sign marks a place of difference. ... the sign is the place where ‘the completely other
is announced as such—without any simplicity, any identity, any resemblance or continuity—in that
which is not it.” DERRIDA, OF GRAMMATOLOGY, supra note 17, at xvi-vii. See also Balkin, supra note
33, at 1674,

46. See generally Dexripa, supra note 17, at Gt.

47. “Such is the strange being of the sign: half of it always ‘not there’ and the other half always
‘not that.’ The structure of the sign is determined by the trace or track of that other which is forever
absent.” DERRIDA, supra note 17, at xvii.

48. See id. at 88 (“Working within the opposition, the deconstruction upsets the hierarchy by
producing an exchange of properties.”)
378 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1464 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

depends on and defers to the qualities of its opposite in order to gain
meaning. At the same time, however, each term must at least momen-
tarily have meaning in order for there to be any relationship of either
contrast or dependence.” This alternating back and forth between a
term’s fullness of meaning and its lack of positive and complete mean-
ing, which Derrida calls “differance,” is at odds with the laws of logic.”

In summary, deconstruction undoes the binary opposition from
within in order to reveal its internal contradictions and rhetorical for-
mulation. Deconstruction shows that for the superior term (e.g., reason)
to function as it is said to, that term necessarily must depend on and de-
fer to the qualities of the inferior term (e.g., passion).' By way of this
reversal, deconstruction shows that reason is just a particular form or
effect of passion—the passion to repress passion.

However, deconstruction does not perform this operation merely to
reverse the terms and show that all reason is a form of passion. Indeed,
the reversed hierarchy can also be deconstructed to show that all passion
is a form of reason. Rather, deconstruction aims to displace the ordered
binary opposition by demonstrating that it is a rhetorical artifact that
depends on particular categories already contained in language and
not on any account of what is “true” or “real” in the world outside of
language.

B. Deconstructive Practice in Action: Reason and the Mob

In “Reason and the Mob,” Gary Peller provides a wonderful ex-
ample of a deconstructive reading that illustrates the “differance”—the
simultaneous difference and deferral—between reason and passion.”
Peller deconstructs a text authored by Nathan Scott in the Virginia
Quarterly Review, in which Scott relies on the binary opposition between
reason and passion to argue that rationalism should prevail over post-
structuralism.*

 

49. “The value of the transcendental arche [origin] must make its necessity felt before letting
itself be erased. The concept of the arche-trace must comply with both that necessity and that
erasure. It is in fact contradictory and not acceptable within the logic of identity.” DERRIDA, supra
note 17, at 61.

50. See id. Derrida calls this relationship of mutual differing and deference “differance.” See
generally DERRIDA, supra note 17.

51. See CULLER, supra note 29, at x.

52. See Gary Peller, Reason and the Mob: Politics of Representation, 2 TIKKUN 28 (1989).

53. See Nathan Scott, The New Trahison Des Cleres: Reflections on the Present Crisis in
Humanistic Studies, 62 Va. Q. Rev. 402 (1986).
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 379

1997} BIAS AND MERIT 1465

Peller first sets forth the parts of the text in which Scott argues that
rationalism should be preferred to post-structuralism because the latter
is nihilistic, anti-rationalist, and ultimately violent. Scott writes:

Today, of course, the enterprising anti-humanism of the post-
Structuralist movement is in full tide, and it presents us with the
great example in contemporary intellectual life of the new
trahison des clercs. This phrase forms the title of a once famous
book by the French critic Julien Benda which was first published
in 1927, and in English the phrase is best rendered as the
“betrayal of the intellectuals”. ... [Benda] was moved to ad-
vance the rather extravagant charge that the typical intellectuals
of the modern period, identifying themselves with class rancor
and nationalist sentiment, have abdicated their true calling in the
interests of political passion: instead of quelling the mob and
beckoning it toward true community, they have joined the mob,
concurring in its lust for quick results and adopting its devotion
to the pragmatic and the expedient. ... And it is his fiercely re-
proachful term that appears now to be the appropriate epithet for
the intellectual insurgency that is currently sowing a profound
disorder in the . . . humanities.“

Using terms and arguments from Scott’s text, Peller then identifies
the binary oppositions that give Scott’s argument its meaning:

Scott’s rhetoric...contains a group of associations with the
intellectuals and with the mob that can assist us in
determining its meaning. The distinction between the mob
and the intellectuals and the justification for the superiority
of the intellectuals are suggested by the fact that the mob
is characterized by social desire—it is associated with “class
rancor,” “nationalist sentiment,” “political passion,” “Just,”

“disorder,” and “insurgency.”

The intellectual, on the other hand, stands in contrast to these
features: the intellectual is supposed to represent order and dis-
passion rather than “rancor” and “sentiment,” neutrality as
opposed to politics, the “disciplined” search for “knowledge
and truth” rather than the lustful satisfaction of passion and de-
sire, the ideal and the long term as opposed to the “pragmatic
and the expedient.”

In short, Scott’s argument seems animated by a structure of

meaning where reason and passion are distinguished from each
other. Reason is associated with the intellect, knowledge, truth,

 

54, Peller, supra note 52, at 30.
380 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL {Vol. 10:363

1466 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

neutrality, and objectivity; passion is associated with disorder,
politics, sentiment, class rancor and unthinking nationalism.”

Next, Peller locates the structural associations—the association of
reason with order and of passion with disorder—in the Westen
Enlightenment discourse on civilization and social progress:

Scott’s appeal is to a general language of social progress and
development—the intellectual is favored over the mob because
the mob is, in a sense, less human, closer to nature,
primitive. ... [T]he failure to regulate the emotional with the
rational would in a sense be giving in to our animal urges,
opening up the possibility of regression and the end of
civilization.*

Using these textual associations, Peller summarizes Scott’s central
argument: we should prefer rationalism to post-structuralism because
we should prefer civilized order to primitive violence.” Explaining why
Scott’s argument is persuasive, Peller refers to concrete images from
shared cultural history that appear to justify a social preference for rea-
son over passion. Peller includes the image of the Southern lynch mob,
in which passion threatens the order imposed by reason:

Probably the most powerful single image in the American expe-
rience is the image of the Southern lynch mob... .[I]n the
common understanding, the mob, ruled by irrational racism
against Blacks, bypassed the orderly, rational, and judicial means
of dispensing justice in favor of the ‘pragmatic and the expedi-
ent,’ simply acting on the basis of their passionate emotions.™

Peller then proceeds to deconstruct the conceptual opposition be-
tween reason and desire. First, he reverses Scott’s structural associations
to show that in order for reason to function as it is said to—to maintain
order and to displace passion—it must necessarily depend on and defer
to the strategies of coercive violence normally associated with passion.

{I]t strikes us as initially dissonant that the intellectuals are asked
to ‘quell’ the mob. The very ability of the intellect to ‘quell’
suggests that in some way the intellectuals are like the mob, pos-
sessing coercive power. Yet it was the potential for the mob to
coerce that justified its regulation by the intellectuals.

The power of the intellect to ‘queil’ introduces the possibility
that reason is actually a means of discipline, a coercive

 

55, Id. at3l.
56, Id. at 31, 92.
57. See id. at 92.
58. Id. at3l.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 381

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1467

technology for the social regulation of passion and emotion. At
both the individual and social levels, reason plays the role of
standing in the place of desire and deferring it to another time or
place. ... But once we see reason as the regulator of passion, as
a technology, we also realize that reason is constructed out of so-
cial power... . Reason itself yields no determinate basis that
would allow us to choose between the alternatives. ...[Rleason
can only ‘quell’ desire on an individual level by the means of
desire itself, by becoming the desire to defer desire, and reason
can only control desire on a social scale by becoming social de-
sire—the mob. ... Like the mob, reason promises a coerced so-
cial order based on a particular social desire.®

Completing the reversal, Peller demonstrates that, rather than de-
scribing passion as the absence of reason (which privileges reason as the
superior term), reason can be redescribed as an effect of desire. In par-
ticular, reason can be understood as the emotional, subjective and arbi-
trary desire to defer desire with regard to certain decisions, and to “give
in’ to desire in other, more “appropriate” circumstances.

Next, Peller contends that the conventional distinction between rea-
son and passion appears coherent and legitimate only by suppressing
those subverse instances in which reason overtly depends on and defers
to strategies of passion or vice-versa. For example, Peller recovers from
history the repressed image of religious persecution of the infidel and
the heretic, when reason was used coercively to suppress the possibility
of religious rebellion. Pelier argues that the image of religious persecu-
tion must be suppressed in order to achieve reason’s position as a so-
cially acceptable form of desire:

Thus reason is only desire that has become institutionalized as
good sense, that has achieved social conventionality, that is no
longer recognizable as [passion] because it no longer bears the
signs of its emotion, the rage that marked the historic efforts to
repress the passion of the other, the infidel and the here-
tic.... [H]aving achieved its goal, reason can appear free of the
violence that is its history.”

Moreover, Peller argues, the privilege we accord to reason is dic-
tated by the larger Enlightenment story of “social progress through
enlightened reason.” According to Peller, that story is a product of the
categories already contained in a particular ideological and political
language game about social progress:

 

59, fd. at 92.
60. id.
382 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1468 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

[Tjhese distinctions are not simply natural and necessary ways to
divide up the world, but rather form the language for a particular
discourse of authority and power....[T]hese very ways of
thinking and talking about social life already embody a particu-
lar discourse of power that seeks to legitimize social hierarchy
by claiming to have escaped politics, superstition, and the mere
conventionality of language. ... [the] supposedly rational or
scientific interpretations of the world.”

In summary, Peller’s deconstructive reading highlights most of the
important ideas from the preceding introduction to deconstruction.
First, Peller’s reading provides an excellent example of deconstructive
reversal and displacement, in which the two terms in a binary opposition
exchange properties and trade places on the hierarchical ladder to illus-
trate that they are functions of a language game.” Peller demonstrates
that, for reason to quell the violence of passion as it is said to, reason
must possess the violence and coercive social power associated with pas-
sion. Deferring to and depending on the properties of passion, reason
loses its metaphysical privilege and is demoted to the inferior position in
the binary relation, and becomes just a socially acceptable form of pas-
sion. The argument for preferring reason over passion now collapses
under the weight of its own analysis, and the opposition dissolves.

Second, Peller demonstrates the post-structuralist idea that the bi-
nary opposition between reason and passion is itself merely a rhetorical
formulation, produced by the categories and associations already con-
tained in an ideological discourse or representational practice.” His
reading reveals the opposition’s rhetorical nature by uncovering a logi-
cally impossible relationship between terms, in which reason depends on
and defers to passion, even as it simultaneously opposes passion.

Finally, Peller locates the rhetorical opposition and its associations
in a particular discourse. He points out that the binary opposition
between reason and passion, and the association between reason and or-
der, as well as passion and disorder, are the product of the Western

 

61. dd. at 94,

62. “First, we were able to shaw that Scott’s text yielded no stable, authoritative meaning; to the
contrary, Scott’s argument could be read in one way as advocating the elevation of reason over
passion; yet we were also able to use the text’s own terms of anlaysis to reverse this meaning, . . .” Id.
at 93.

63. Deconstruction “is not simply a strategic reversal of categories which otherwise remain
distinct and unaffected. It seeks to undo both a given order of priorities and the very system of
conceptual opposition that makes that order possible.” Norris, supra note 16, at 31. By inverting the
hierarchy, deconstruction “uncovers and undoes the rhetorical operations” that privilege the first
term over the supplement. CULLER, supra note 17, at 88.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 383

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1469

Enlightenment story of social progress, which associates reason with
progress and passion with the destruction of civilization.“

I
DECONSTRUCTING THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN MERIT AND Bras

A. The Binary Opposition: Merit vs. Bias

In their most recent work, Beyond Reason: The Radical Assault on
Truth in American Law, Daniel Farber and Suzanna Sherry continue
their challenge to the “radical constructivist” argument that merit stan-
dards are socially constructed in ways that arbitrarily favor the abilities
of the dominant majority. The book, which collects many of Farber
and Sherry’s previous essays, argues that disproportionate success rates
for Jews and Asian Americans undermine the radical claim that merit is
arbitrary and designed to reinforce white male power. In addition, ac-
cording to the authors, the radical constructivist position may be used
for anti-Semitic or anti-Asian®” ends, because the critique indicts the ac-
complishments of some Asian groups and Jews as unfairly obtained:

Radical constructivists contend that standards of merit are so-
cially constructed to maintain the power of dominant groups. In
other words, ‘merit’ has no meaning, except as a way for those
in power to perpetuate the existing hierarchy. In explaining why
some minorities have been less successful than whites, these writ-
ers repudiate genuine merit as even a partial explanation of the
current distribution of social goods. They are then left in a
quandary, unable to explain the success of other minority
groups that have actually surpassed the dominant major-
ity....[N]Jo [other] explanation for compétitive success can be
anything but negative. These groups have obtained dispropor-
tionate shares of important social goods; if they have not earned

 

64. By reversing the relationship between reason and passion, and thereby showing how reason
might be seen as simply the effect of passion rather than its regulator, this critical interpretation
showed how the rational, determinate sense of the argument actually depended on an initial, arational
association between reason and particular cultural and political visions of social life. Jd. at 94.

65. The authors distinguish the radical constructivist, who views “fundamental concepts” like
merit to be “socially constructed aspects of systems of power,” from the moderate social
constructivist, who merely acknowledges that categories like race and sexual orientation are socially
constructed, Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 855. The authors offer
William Eskridge as an example of the former, and Richard Delgado, among others, to exemplify the
latter. Id.

66. See FARBER & SHERRY, BEYOND ALL REASON, supra note 2, at 57-59; Farber & Sherry,
Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 856.

67. The term “Asian” is used here to refer to Asians who are not long-term residents of the
U.S., those who are, and Asian Americans.
384 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1470 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW {Vol. 85:1449

their shares fairly on the merits, then they must have done so
unjustly. Thus, the radical constructivist view of merit logically
carries negative implications regarding groups that have sur-
passed the dominant majority... .“

In setting out their argument, Farber and Sherry deploy the con-
ventional binary opposition which positions merit and bias as opposites.
This opposition is most obvious in a long passage (part of which ap-
pears in the opening citation) in which the authors defend merit on the
grounds that, at least theoretically, it is race-neutral.

The meritocratic ideal is that positions in society should be based
on the abilities and achievements of the individual rather than on
characteristics such as family background, race, religion, or
wealth. This ideal requires that merit must be objective in the
sense of being definable without reference to those personal
characteristics. John Rawls has described the underlying concept
of justice as one of careers “open to talents,” a concept first
adopted by egalitarians who rejected previous aristocratic under-
standings of human worth.

Under this conventional view, the ultimate conception of merit is

color-blind and gender-blind. Its advocates believe that people

are treated unjustly and discriminated against “when their merit

is assessed according to their status rather than according to the

value of their traits or products.” Thus, for instance, under this

conception of merit, racial discrimination “is irrational and un-

just because it denies the individual what is due him or her under

the society’s agreed standards of merit.”

Randall Kennedy, to whom Farber and Sherry cite in the passage

above, similarly defends his preference for merit in its pure theoretical
form.

As I use the word, ‘merit’ is an honorific term that identifies a
quality of accomplishment that has been achieved; it does not
refer to inherited characteristics such as race or gender. As
a matter of theory, this conception of merit is rather

 

68. Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 856-57. See also FARBER &
SHERRY, BEYOND ALL REASON, supra note 2, at 11 (“If merit is nothing but a mask for white male
privilege, then it becomes difficult to defend the fact that Jews and Asians are quite
disproportionately successful. If their success cannot be justified as fairly earned, it can only be
attributed to a heightened degree of entanglement with white male privilege. In short, we believe that
radical multiculturalism implies that Jews and Asian Americans are unjustly favored in the social
distribution of goods.”’).

69. Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 858-59 (citing Randall L.
Kennedy).
1998) BIAS AND MERIT 385

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 147]

conventional. ...I do not want race-conscious decisionmaking
to be assimilated into our conception of meritocracy.”

A close look at Farber and Sherry’s (and Kennedy’s) argument
reveals that they have set up their objectivist defense of merit through a
set of ordered binary oppositions in the text. Merit, they argue, is
“based on ability and achievement of the individual” as measured
through “the value of traits or products.””’ In contrast, bias involves an
assessment “according to status” or “inherited characteristics.”
According to the text, merit is “objective” when it is “definable with-
out reference to [the] personal characteristics” or the “inherited char-
acteristics” of “family background, race, religion or wealth.”” Bias, in
comparison, is presumably “subjective” because it is defined according
to those characteristics.”

In addition, merit is “just” because everyone “has an equal op-
portunity to compete for desirable occupations.” Bias, on the other
hand, is “unjust” because it “denies the individual what is due him or
her under the society’s agreed standards of merit.” Where bias is an
“irrational” “deviation” from the ideal of “colorblind” meritocracy,
merit presumably is both rational and “colorblind.”’* In sum, merit
promotes economic efficiency, ability and achievement, and therefore
can be associated logically with justice, equal opportunity, objectivity,
rationality, and color blindness.” Bias, on the other hand, is based on

 

70. Randall L. Kennedy, Racial Critiques of Legal Academia, 102 Harv. L, Rev. 1745, 1806-07
(1989).

71. Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, al 858-59.

72. Td.

73. dd.

74. Duncan Kennedy calls this genre of argument, which presumes that there is something out
there in the real world called merit, “colorblind meritocratic fundamentalism.” Duncan Kennedy, A
Cuitural Pluralist Case, supra note 9, at 707.

75. “This ideal holds at once that all people must have equal rights and opportunities to develop
their peculiar talents and virtues, and that there should be equal rewards for equal

performances. ...[MlJerit tests, at least in theory, provide a basis for procedural justice in
distribution.” /d. at 836, 838.
76.

[FJacts of parentage and ancestry should not count as formal bars to access... . There has,

however, developed a widespread, even consensual conception of moral irrelevance that is

central to accepted interpretations of equality and of merit.... Because race is considered

a factor irrelevant to virtually any morally permissible human purpose, merit distribution has

been considered—and remains in the popular mind—a diametric alternative to selection on

the basis of race.
Id. at 836, 837.

77, Distributing on the basis of merit serves as the perfect technocratic tool to efficiently

“allocate resources to persons likely to use them productively .... And, by employing those capable
of greatest productivity, private industry increases the wealth available for distribution within the
386 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1472 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

status or inherited traits, and is therefore associated with the opposing
characteristics—injustice, lack of equal opportunity, subjectivity, irra-
tionality, and race-consciousness.

Using these binary oppositions, Farber and Sherry contend that
merit is objective and rational because, at least in its ideal form, it fo-
cuses neutrally on individual traits, abilities and achievements that con-
tain social value. Later in the text, the authors use this colorblind vision
of merit to support their argument that, in light of the relatively greater
success rate under conventional merit standards for Jews and Asians,
merit cannot be a race-conscious weapon designed to keep white males
in power.”

Farber and Sherry’s descriptions of merit and bias appears to be
consistent with our intuition that, in order to fight racism, we need to
focus on “objective criteria” as a way of displacing bias. Under a true
meritocracy, people will not be excluded because they are Mexican-
American or Black or Jewish, but because they do not score as highly
on objective tests of ability or some other indicia of social value.” As
Professor Sherry recounts, one promise of the Enlightenment was to
replace subjective bias with objective merit, to the benefit of those out-
siders whom bias had kept out:

The lasting accomplishment of the Enlightenment... method
was a repudiation of the “the millennium of superstition, other-
worldliness, mysticism, and dogma known as the Middle, or Dark
Ages.” ...Instead, the human capacity to reason, in all its
splendor, would control the future. As Justice Felix Frankfurter
commented in a related context, “[w]hat mattered was excel-
lence in your profession to which your father or your face was
equally irrelevant.”®

In summary, Farber and Sherry’s conventional treatment of merit
and bias finds much support in social practice. Indeed, our idea of so-
cial progress has depended on the notion that merit rationally and ob-
jectively is based on ability, promotes economic efficiency and
excellence, and is associated with justice and equal opportunity.

 

society. ... The social interest in educating doctors, for example, is best served by educating those
who will be the best doctors.” Richard H. Fallon, Jr., Te Each According To His Ability, From None
Accearding To His Race: The Concept of Merit In the Law of Antidiscrimination, 60 B.U. L. REv. 815,
823, 838 (1980).

78. See Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 868-71.

79. See STEPHEN JAY GouLD, THE MISMEASURE OF MAN 23] (1981). See also Delgado,
supra note 9, at 1711 (fictional friend of Rodrigo Crenshaw argues that objective standards are
African American’s best “guarantor against racism’).

80. Suzanna Sherry, The Sleep of Reason, 84 Geo. L. J. 453, 456-57 (1996).
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 387

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1473

B. Deconstructive Reversal: How Merit Defers to Bias

As soon as the meaning of Farber and Sherry’s distinction appears
to stabilize, however, it begins to self-de(con)struct. Reversing the
authors’ structural associations, we discover that for merit to do the job
of rewarding ability and creating social value (and thereby displace
bias), it must depend on and defer to subjective, arbitrary, status-
oriented, culturally-specific definitions of “social value.” Put differ-
ently, in order for merit to function as the opposite of bias, it must defer
to and depend on social bias towards particular traits and abilities.

In their text, Farber and Sherry make the connection between merit
and social value explicit, when they justify social preference for merit
on the grounds that it distributes opportunities and resources on the ba-
sis of “the value of [applicant’s] traits or products” rather than
“status.’® According to Farber and Sherry’s own text, “merit” is
made possible by, and must necessarily defer to, the social value of cer-
tain traits or products.

But historical preferences about what constitutes ‘“‘social value” in
a given industry or profession are necessarily subjective standards, so-
cially constructed by professional leaders who have the status to make
such choices. Far from being the opposite of “bias,” the concept of
merit is necessarily inscribed with subjective, status-based social bias,
which merit sought to exclude in the first place. Indeed, we can rede-
scribe merit as the effect of bias rather than its privileged opposite, be-
cause social bias supplies the “social value” that merit purportedly
promotes. Thus, merit can be viewed from this alternative perspective as
socially acceptable bias for certain kinds of qualities.

Moreover, the opposition itself cannot tell us when a preference is
an illegitimate “bias” or valid “merit.” Those distinctions ultimately
are determined by politics, culture and ideology. For example, we for-
mulate our ideas about what constitutes social value in the legal profes-
sion based in large part on our political, ideological and moral
commitments about what constitutes a legal dispute and how a legal

 

81. See also Fallon, supra note 77, at 815 n.1 (citing to the following definitions of merit from
other scholars: qualities that count as merit that are useful to society (Karst & Horowitz, Affirmative
Action and Equal Protection, 60 Va, L. REV. 955, 961-63 (1974)); ‘endowments’ and ‘achievements’
that are “praised, coveted or admired” (Shapiro, Who Merits Merit? Problems in Distributive Justice
and Utility Posed by the New Biology, 48 S. Car. L. Rev, 318, 321-22 (1974))); id. at 823 (“Merit
cannot be judged apart from human interests and desires... . [and] ‘will bring the most talented
individuals to positions of power and responsibility, and that the competitors will produce social goods
in the process of demonstrating that they merit power and responsibility.’”) (citing to Karst &
Horowitz, supra).
388 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1474 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

system should resolve a dispute, or whether government should even
play. a role in resolving disputes. To be sure, the social value we seek to
promote is not based on deductive reasoning about the human person-
ality or natural laws governing human relationships. Nor have our ideas
about legal education evolved in some Darwinian fashion to produce the
most superior form of legal education to date. Rather, our ideas about
social value are a function of contingent history, of time and chance.
That is, various historical and social forces have converged at certain
points in time to produce our peculiar legal institutions and practices,
which are useful for awhile and then inevitably are in need of revision,
as time passes and different historical and social forces converge.

The history of law school admissions standards illustrates the ar-
gument that merit standards necessarily defer to or depend on socially
subjective and historically contingent biases about social value in the
profession. A review of history reveals that our notions of value in legal
education and the legal profession were developed in the early part of
this century by leaders of the profession, who had acquired their leader-
ship status based in large part on their race. Those leaders, and the in-
stitutions in which they were ensconced, developed certain ideas about
what constituted “social value” and “ability” in practice and in legal
education.” Given the fact that the legal profession had affirmatively
excluded people of color at the time, those choices about social value
reflected, if not embodied, the race-consciousness of early twentieth
century legal culture. At the very least, those choices took place in the
context of a culture in which racial exclusion was routine and relatively
uncontroversial.

 

82. Critical history is a tool often deployed by Critical Race theorists and deconstructivists alike.
Critical Race Theory views social institutions and practices as products of historical circumstance, in
which relationships of power, and in particular, racial power, determine the content of those
practices and institutions. Critical historical inquiry maps the ways in which structures like merit or
property are not natural or race-neutral ways of framing the world, but are a historical collection of
strategies and discourses born of and deployed in particular political, cultural, and institutional
conflicts. Using critical historical methods, radical scholars interpret the development of standards of
merit and bias as a contingent response to a particular set of historical circumstances, in which social
and racial power ultimately determined who would be excluded from institutions that distribute power
and wealth. See CriTiIcAL RACE THEORY: THE Key WRITINGS THAT FORMED THE MOVEMENT Xvi
(Kimberlé Crenshaw et al. eds., 1995). See also Introduction to Worps THat Wounp 6 (C.
Lawrence et al. eds., 1993) (critical historical inquiry “challenges ahistoricism and insists on a
contextual/historical analysis of the law,” to view legal institutions in the actual context of history and
relationships of race and power).
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 389

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1475

1. The Formulation of Merit Standards in Law School Admissions

Much has been written about the issue of merit and bias in law
school admission standards. For as long as law schools have adminis-
tered aptitude tests, Latino/a and African-American applicants dispro-
portionately have achieved lower scores than white applicants." Many
scholars have argued that such results are due to improper procedures
or a cultural bias in the test itself.“ For example, Professor Leslie
Espinoza has pointed out that past LSATs have contained questions
about culturally specific phenomena, like polo matches and regattas,
with which applicants of color are not likely to be familiar. Other
scholars contend that Blacks and Latinos/as have disproportionately
lower LSAT scores and undergraduate GPAs because they lack compa-
rable educational opportunities and suffer from other forms of disad-
vantage.®

Both arguments assume, however, that there is something “out
there” called “merit”—the knack for legal reasoning, smarts, or dili-
gence—that at least in theory is race-neutral. Both arguments also

 

83. See Susan Brown AND EDUARDO MARENCO, Jr., MEXICAN-AMERICAN LEGAL DEFENSE
AND EDUCATIONAL FuND (MALDEF) Law ScHoot Apmissions Stupy [hereinafter MALDEF
Stupy] 16-17 (1980).

84, See Derrick A. Bell, Jr., In Defense of Minority Admissions Programs, 119 U. Pa. L. Rev.
364, 367 (1970) (arguing that the LSAT is insufficiently predictive); Delgado, Rodrigo’s Tenth
Chronicle, supra note 9, at 1740-42 (arguing that the SAT and the LSAT have test items about
toboggans, lacrosse, polo and regattas, concepts with which applicants of color are not likely to be
familiar); Leslie G. Espinoza, The Bias of LSAT Narratives, 1 AM. U. J. GENDER & L. 121, 129 (1993)
(arguing that LSAT narratives contain offensive racial stereotypes and concepts with which minority
applicants would be less familiar); Portia Y. T. Hamlar, Minority Tokenism in American Law Schools,
26 How. L.J. 443, 468-513 (1983) (extensive review of various challenges to law schools’ use of the
LSAT and GPA); James C. Hathaway, The Mythical Meritocracy of Law School Admissions, 34 |.
Lecac Epuc. 86, 94 (1984) (arguing that the LSAT only explains 14 or 15 percent of law school
performance, and presents a particularly inaccurate picture of the likely success of men, younger
students, and members of racial minorities); David A. Weber, Racial Bias and the LSAT: A New
Approach to the Defense of Preferential Admissions, 24 Burr. L. Rev. 439 (1974) (arguing that the
LSAT’s questions contained biased items). See also MALDEF Stupy, supra note 83, at 16-17
(arguing that grades and LSAT scores are overused).

85. Espinoza, supra note 84, at 129.

86. See Jamie B. Raskin, Affirmative Action and Racial Reaction, 38 How. L.J. 521, 554 (1995)
{contending that merit criteria do not take into account a multitude of disadvantages suffered by
applicants of color). See also Delgado, Rodrigo’s Tenth Chronicle, supra note 9, at 1718 (arguing that
disparity between haves and have-nots, with regard to education, constitutes a pre-existing
disadvantage that neutral mechanisms do not take into account); id. at 1738 (wealthy whites have
advantages in education and income that may explain higher achievement); id. at 1725 (noting that
merit does not take into account the ability to overcome past disadvantage and past hurdles
surmounted). Current proposals to revise affirmative action programs to reflect class often evince a
desire to focus on proportional disadvantage. See Albert Y. Muratsuchi, Race, Class, and UCLA
School of Law Admissions, 1967-1994, 16 CHICANO-LATINO L. REv. 90 (1995).
390 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1476 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

assume that people of color have been unfairly prevented from acquir-
ing “merit” because of discrimination. Finally, both sides appear will-
ing to concede that properly validated tests can theoretically measure an
applicant’s “true” ability to succeed in law school in a race-neutral way.

But opponents of admissions standards need not concede the stan-
dards’ theoretical color-blindness quite so quickly. When one situates
law school admission standards in their historical context, it appears that
merit criteria deferred to and depended on the race-conscious social
bias of the time to define what constituted “social value” in the legal
profession. As is detailed extensively in the following discussion, admis-
sions standards reflected the subjective preferences of white male lawyer
elites. These leaders had acquired social power or “status” within the
legal culture of the early twentieth century, in large part because of their
race, given that people of color were affirmatively excluded from the
profession at the time. Moreover, the leadership’s subjective preferences
about “social value” substantially reflected if not embodied the profes-
sion’s desire to exclude Black and immigrant applicants from the prac-
tice of law.

The development of law-school admission standards can be traced
to a number of related events occurring in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. First, the number of European immigrants and
African-Americans entering into the legal profession and law schools
increased dramatically. At the same time, large, elite corporate law firms
gained prominence on the Eastern seaboard, and created symbiotic re-
lationships with prestigious Eastern law schools, at least in part to create
a “safe haven” from the influx of immigrants. In addition, in an effort
to prevent both immigrants and African Americans from gaining admis-
sion to practice law, the American Bar Association (“ABA”) was
formed. The ABA was part of a larger movement to eliminate part-time,
night-time, and proprietary law schools, which served the rising numbers
of immigrants and African Americans who sought to become lawyers.
Reinforcing the hierarchy between prestigious law schools and schools
that served immigrants and African Americans, Christopher Columbus
Langdell and others introduced the case method into elite law schools,
which helped to orient legal education toward abstract legal reasoning
and away from practical experience. As discussed below, these events all
were directly or indirectly related to the more general explosion of rac-
ist and nativist sentiment in the legal culture and in American society
during the period.

Prior to 1870, seasoned lawyers trained aspiring practitioners in an
apprenticeship program governed by the Inns of Court. Serving as the
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 391

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1477

central institution governing legal practice at the time, the Inns permit-
ted lawyers to select their apprentices, determine the nature and duration
of their apprenticeships, and prescribe attainments necessary for bar
membership.” Lawyers obtained very little formal training in legal the-
ory, and those who did “read the law’—mostly old English treatises—
did so under the guidance of a mentor.™ Some aspiring lawyers at-
tended proprietary law schools, where practicing attorneys taught a few
basic forensic skills and hornbook rules from treatises like Blackstone’s
Commentaries.” Both apprenticeship programs and proprietary schools
emphasized practical technique.

From 1870 to 1920, record numbers of immigrants from Eastern
and Southern Europe flooded into the United States, and many began to
seek entry into the legal profession.” Many first and second generation
immigrants saw the practice of law as a gateway to economic opportu-
nity." Free public education at lower levels meant that immigrants
could save their money toward tuition for part-time and night-time
classes at proprietary schools. In response to new demand, proprietary
law schools sprang up almost overnight in large numbers, predomi-
nantly in cities with heavy immigrant populations.”

Typically, the immigrant student had far less formal education than
his native-born counterpart, and the immigrant’s parents were less likely
to be professionals.” The immigrant practitioner was also much more
likely to practice in criminal law, real estate, and non-commercial civil
law.™ Jerold Auerbach describes how the professional elite began to
create “selective” institutions, based in large part on the profile of the
immigrant practitioner, in order to protect their elite status.

As mass immigration and urbanization inundated the domi-
nant Anglo-Saxon culture, the fortunate few moved to the safety
of selected social institutions—Eastern schools, for example, and
careers in business and finance—which could protect, or extend,

 

87. See, e.g., Charles C. McKirdy, The Lawyer as Apprentice: Legal Education in Eighteenth
Century Massachusetts, 28 J. LEGAL Ep. 124 (1976).

88. See id. at 198.

89. See id.

90. See Gerard W. Gawalt, The Impact of Industrialization of the Legal Profession 1870-1900,
in THe New Hich Priests: Lawyers IN Post-Civit War America 97, 103 (Gerard W. Gawalt
ed., 1984) (hereinafter HIGH Priests].

91, See Ropert Stevens, Law SCHOOL: LEGAL EDUCATION IN AMERICA FROM THE 1850s
TO THE 1980s 81 (1983).

92. See id. at 74.

93. See id.

94. See Gawalt, supra note 90, at 103.
392 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1478 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

their power and status.... Big business served as “a new pre-
serve of the older Americans, where their status and influence
could continue and flourish.”%

These big business clients, whose numbers increased exponentially
as America underwent industrialization, in turn, created a demand for
large corporate law firms along the Eastern seaboard.** Given the demo-
graphic makeup of big business at the time, firms catered to those cli-
ents by limiting entry into the firm to Easterners of “old-American
stock,” whose fathers were, like the firm’s clients, wealthy professionals
or businessmen.” Quite predictably, symbiotic relationships formed
between these corporate firms and the elite law schools. Big firms be-
gan to court only the top graduates from the “best” schools, and law
schools discovered that grades and law review membership were a way
to help separate the “appropriate” applicant from others who would
not fit into big firm culture. Law schools were enthusiastic participants
in the process, because they were able to reinforce their elite status by
serving as a pipeline to funnel associates into the most prestigious
firms.”

In addition to closing ranks between big firms and prestigious law
schools, prominent members of the profession also responded to the
influx of immigrants by calling for “reform” on many fronts. Leaders
of the profession created reform-minded bar organizations that limited
their membership to the most affluent lawyers, all of whom were of

 

95. JeRotp S. AUERBACH, UNEQUAL JusTICE: LAWYERS AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN MODERN
AMERICA 24-28 (1976) (citation omitted).

96. See id. at 27.

97. See id. at 21-25. For example, Cravath, Swaine and Moore attomeys were recruited more
heavily from prestigious law schools because “[t]he best men, too, are most likely to be found in the
law schools which have established reputations... .”. Robert T. Swaine, The Cravath Firm and Its
Predecessors, in JouN T. Noonan, Jr. AND RICHARD W. PAINTER, THE LAWYER: PERSONAL AND
PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY 318 (1997) (hereinafter NOONAN AND PAINTER]. Attomeys were
also selected for partnership based on intangibles that included “personality, judgment and
character.” /d. Not surprisingly, Cravath’s partnership criteria produced a partnership that was
almost exclusively white, male, old-American stock of Northern European ancestry, Protestant, and
upper class. See Complaint, Lucido v. Cravath, Swaine & Moore, in NOONAN AND PAINTER, id. at
328 (‘‘Cravath for years did not have any Jewish partner at the firm. On information and belief, the
first Jewish partner was promoted to partnership in 1958....Cravath has had only one female
partner. ... Cravath has never had a black partner nor a Spanish-surnamed partner.”)

98. See Gawalt, supra note 90, at 107 (“‘It was obviously much simpler’ for law firms ‘to
discriminate among recruits in terms of the law school they had attended than the type of law office
in which they had apprenticed. In addition, the law school provided a convenient measure of
competence in their ratings of students by academic achievement.’”) (citing JEROME CARLIN,
Lawyers ON THEIR Own: A STUDY OF INDIVIDUAL PRACTITIONERS IN CHICAGO 20-21 (1962)).
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 393

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1479

old-American stock.” After much discussion about the downward di-
rection of the profession, in 1878 a group of elite lawyers created the
American Bar Association for the purpose of restricting entry into the
profession, and they vowed to “admit no men who would not be worthy
members.”'™ As discussed later in this section, the ABA was instrumen-
tal in pushing for reforms relating to the “moral character’ and aca-
demic aptitude of applicants to the bar, both of which could be traced to
anti-immigrant and racist sentiment.

Strains of nativism and racism were also evident legal education. In
1917, the ABA and the Association of American Law Schools
(“AALS”) commissioned non-lawyer Alfred Z. Reed to study the state
of legal education and to make recommendations for reform.'" Both
organizations had been inspired by the success of the Flexner report, a
similar study of medical schools that had called for the medical profes-
sion to close many part-time or newly created programs.’” In 1921,
Reed issued his first report, which described the legal profession as
stratified along class, racial and ethnic lines.'* Reed agreed with earlier
writers who viewed proprietary schools as supplying the needs of mem-
bers of the social strata “whose sons [were not] thinking of university
education,” but who looked to the law school for training in a craft.’
However, unlike many commentators of the time, Reed proposed creat-
ing different tracks for both bar and law schools to coincide with the
two strata." He predicted that if the intellectually less fashionable
schools were driven out of business, large segments of the practice areas
that were most useful for immigrant and racial groups would go un-
served.'%

Reed’s report was published only a month after the ABA’s
Committee on Legal Education had issued their own report on the same

 

99. See John A. Matzko, ‘The Best Men of the Bar:’ The Founding of the American Bar
Association, in HIGH PRIESTS, supra note 90, at 78.

100. /d. at 88-89. ABA leaders also craved the opportunity to vacation each year in Saratoga
Springs, New York. Saratoga Springs was chosen as the site for ABA leadership meetings “because
more wealthy lawyers were likely to vacation at this prestigious spa than at any other in the country.”
id. at 87, Lawyers referred to an early group of ABA leaders as the “Saratoga clique,” whose self-
appointed mission was to direct the association from “the hotel porch after lunch.” /d.

101, See Robert Stevens, Two Cheers For 1870: The American Law School, in Law iN
AMERICAN History 403, 450 (D. Fleming & B. Bailyn eds., 1971).

102. See id. at 449-50.

103. STEVENS, supra note 91, at 113.

104. Id. (citing Joser RepiicH, COMMON Law AND THE CaSE METHOD IN AMERICAN
University Law Scuoots, 70 (1914)).

105. STEVENS, supra note 91 at 114; Stevens, supra note 101, at 452.

106. STEVENS, supra note 91 at 114.
394 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1480 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

matter.'” Displeased with the ABA’s lack of support for legal educa-
tion, the AALS had pressured the ABA into creating the Committee, to
be chaired by former ABA president Elihu Root.’™ Predictably, the Root
report pressed for a unitary bar, arguing that the different parts of the
profession required the same intellectual training,'!” and that such train-
ing could only be provided by law schools, preferably within a univer-
sity setting.'"" By 1927 the AALS and the ABA had issued lists of
approved schools, and had done away with any requirements for office-
training or other apprenticeship.'"' The ABA had also increased law
school admission requirements to include two years of college train-
ing.!?

Ignoring pressure from the ABA, Reed issued a second report in
1928, denouncing the homogenization of law schools, which he traced
in part to the growing use of the case-law method.’” In keeping with his
earlier report, Reed proposed creating two types of schools to match the
stratification in the profession.'’ In 1930, the ABA rejected his recom-
mendations and passed a resolution against commercially operated
schools. The ABA also created the National Conference of Bar
Examiners to centralize the standards for bar examinations; whereupon
the conference promptly proposed that bar-exam questions be modeled
after questions being tested at the “better” vuniversity-affiliated law
schools.'* In 1935, capitalizing on the explosion of racist and nativist
sentiment in the bar, the ABA moved to limit the number of lawyers in
the bar, citing overcrowding and problems with “moral character.”"”’

As was reflected in Reed’s second report, the call for more restric-
tive standards coincided with the move by law schools to formalize legal
education. In the late nineteenth century, Christopher Columbus
Langdell and James Barr Ames introduced the case-law method of legal
instruction, first at Harvard and then at a growing number of elite law
schools aspiring to become even more exclusive.'* Case-law method

 

107. See id. at 115.

108. See id.
109. /d. at 116.
W10. 7d. at 115.
lit. See id.
142. See id.

113. See id. at 120.
114. See id. at 121.

115. fd. at 176.
116. See id, at 177.
117. fd. at 178.

118. See generally Albert J. Harno, Legal Education in the United States, in NOLAN, READINGS
IN THE HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN LEGAL PROFESSION 217 (1980).
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 395

1997) BIAS AND MERIT 1481

devotees believed that law could and should be taught as a science like
math or chemistry. Case-law instruction required the student to distill
general principles from philosophical reflection and historical analysis
of a particular area of the law, and to apply those principles consistent
with the legal system’s more general objective principles.’ Initially,
only a minority of professors endorsed the case-law method, and after
students at Harvard questioned its usefulness, its future appeared uncer-
tain. However, case-law method survived and prospered, in large part
because its proponents included many men of prominent status, among
them the leadership of the newly formed bar associations.”°

The case-law method fulfilled the requirements of modern educa-
tion: it was scientific, practical, and best of all, Darwinian in approach—
it winnowed out large numbers of students, allowing only the “fittest”
and the most able (who also happened to be the most affluent and An-
glo-Saxon) to survive.) The case law method was a point of profes-
sional pride for many elite schools, because it differentiated them from
second-tier schools. The case-law method also afforded the law profes-
sor increased power and influence in the classroom, enabling him to
move from a mere treatise-reading clerk to the author, lead actor, and
director of a classroom drama.’”

In addition to winnowing out large numbers of students, the case-
law method “selected against” practitioner professors, and “selected
for” professional law teachers by making “demands that neither busy
practitioners nor retired gentlemen could meet.” Supporters of the
case-law method pressed for increased affiliation of law schools with
universities, and for the entry of full-time law professors into the
academy.'* In 1873, Harvard appointed its first non-practicing law
professor, James Barr Ames.’* By the turn of the century, defenders of
the case method had begun to prevail in their “holy war of supremacy”
and the remaining practitioner-teachers quickly disappeared.’

 

119. See Robert W. Gordon, ‘The Ideal and the Actual in the Law’: Fantasies and Practices of
New York City Lawyers, 1870-1910 in Hicu PRiEstTs, supra note 90, at 51, 52; Harno, supra note 118,
at 217. According to Langdell, the data for such a scientific inquiry resided not in sociological
observation but in books, and in particular, in appellate opinions. STEVENS, supra note 91, at 53.

120. See Gordon, supra note 119, at 52.

121. See STEVENS, supra note 91, at 55.

122, See id. at 63, 102.

123. AUERBACH, supra note 95, at 75.

124. See id. See also Harno, supra note 118, at 217.

125. See AUERBACH, supra note 95, at 74.

126. Jd. at 75. Responding to those who criticized the modern law school for replacing the
human element with logic, Dean Roscoe Pound observed that modern law had made demands “which
the old type is quite unable as well as unwilling to meet. His mind is not trained for class-room logical
396 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL (Vol. 10:363

1482 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

2. Race and Social Value in Legal Education

In Unequal Justice, Jerold Auerbach traces the foregoing events—
the ascendance of the elite corporate law firm, the spread of the case-law
method, and the ensuing call for “standards’—to virulent anti-
immigrant sentiment, Anti-Semitism and racism in the legal profession
in the early part of this century.'”” Auerbach contends that middle-class,
native-born white lawyers called for “standards,” both “moral charac-
ter” and academic, in order to safeguard their professional respectabil-
ity and status from what they saw as the threat of dilution by the flood
of immigrants and African Americans into the profession.’

As chronicled by Auerbach, many reformers made little attempt to
disguise the racist, anti-immigrant and anti-Semitic prejudices motivat-
ing their call for standards relating to “moral character.” One member
of the Root Committee, who explicitly equated the values of the legal
profession with American cultural values, defended new bar admission
requirements as “an instrument of Americanization” needed to protect
the profession against “[t]he ‘influx of foreigners’ in the cities [who]
comprised an uneducated mass of men who have no conception of our
constitutional government.” Surely, he concluded, “the American
Bar Association did not wish to ‘lower standards simply to let in unedu-
cated foreigners.’”"

Auerbach notes that even the most visible and respected profes-
sional leaders were not subtle about drawing a connection between pro-
fessional concerns about “moral character” and ensuing restrictions
based on ethnicity and immigrant status. Former ABA president Elihu
Root declared, “I do not want anybody to come to the bar which I
honor and revere ... who has not any conception of the moral qualities
that underlie our free American institutions; and they are coming, today,
by the tens of thousands.”

Auerbach describes the anti-Semitic undertone of the “moral char-
acter” debate: .

Even before the war Theron Strong [an influential New York
lawyer and author who wrote about the legal profession]
complained sourly about “the influx of foreigners.” Strong

 

acrobatics. Naturally he claims to compensate by the ‘human’ element that consists better with
indolence. The wail of the unfit is very apt to be made in the name of Demos.” /d. at 84-85.

127. See generally AUERBACH, supra note 95.

128. Gordon, supra note 119, at 53.

129. AUERBACH, supra note 95, at 114 {citation omitted).

130. 7d.

131. dd. at 105.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 397

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1483

was especially troubled by the rising proportion of Jewish
lawyers, which was “extraordinary, and almost overwhelming—
so much so as to make it appear that their numbers were likely to
predominate, while the introduction of their characteristics and
methods has made a deep impression upon the bar.”"?

Auerbach also cites remarks, made by the dean of the University of
Wisconsin Law School in 1915, as evidence that concerns about ethics
were racially motivated. The dean’s statements were quite openly racist
and nativist:
If you examine the class rolls of the night schools in our great
cities, you will encounter a very large proportion of foreign
names. Emigrants and sons of emigrants remembering the re-
spectable standing of the advocate in their own home, covet the
title as a badge of distinction. The result is a host of shrewd
young men, imperfectly educated, crammed so they can pass the
bar examinations ... viewing the Code of Ethics with uncom-
prehending eyes. It is this class of lawyers that cause Grievance
Committees of Bar Associations the most trouble.'®

Concerns about immigrant status and ethnicity were not limited to
the immigrants’ “moral character.” Professional leaders also expressed
dismay and doubt concerning the academic abilities of their immigrant
counterparts. Future Chief Justice Harlan Fiske Stone “referred to ‘the
influx to the bar of greater numbers of the unfit,’ who ‘exhibit racial
tendencies toward study by memorization’ and display ‘a mind almost
Oriental in its fidelity to the minutiae of the subject without regard to
any controlling rule or reason.’”'"* Austen Fox, a prominent lawyer
who would later antagonize Louis D. Brandeis during his Supreme
Court confirmation hearings, spoke of “the many immigrant
boys... [who] can hardly speak English intelligibly and show little un-
derstanding of or feeling for American institutions and government.”
In Fox’s eyes, they were a “group of young men who as a class acquire
very rapidly but do not assimilate—quick to learn and quick to

 

132. AUERBACH, supra note 95, at 107 (citation omitted).
In an apocalyptic memorandum, another lawyer warned of “the great flood of foreign
blood... sweeping into the bar.” Eastern European immigrants, ‘with little inherited sense
of fairness, justice and honor as we understand them,” were committed only to their own
“selfish advancement.” How, the author inquired, “are we to preserve our Anglo-Saxon
law of the land under such conditions?”
fd. (citation omitted).
133, STEVENS, supra note 91, at 109 n.67 (quoting Harry S. Richards, Progress in Legal
Education, 15 HANDBOOK OF THE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN Law ScHoo;s 63 (1915)).
134. AUERBACH, supra note 95, at 107 (citation omitted).
135. /d. at 121 (quoting Austen Fox).
398 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1484 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

forget.” In response to this outpouring of Anti-Semitism and nativ-
ism, in 1909, the Section of Legal Education of the ABA adopted the
requirement that lawyers be American citizens, even though the foreign
student was a market force to be reckoned with, having created a great
demand for proprietary and night schools.”

Efforts to restrict admission to the bar targeted African Americans
as well as immigrants. Paul Finkelman has documented turn-of-the-
century efforts to keep Blacks from practicing law:

Starting in the 1890s, white-dominated southern govern-

ments began to disenfranchise and segregate blacks as a back-
lash against the Civil War and the goals of the Reconstruction.
As blacks lost their newly acquired rights, black lawyers disap-
peated from the scene. For example, in 1900, Mississippi had
twenty-four black lawyers, and South Carolina had twenty-nine.
A decade later Mississippi was down to twenty-one black lawyers
and South Carolina had seventeen. In 1920, both states had only
fourteen black lawyers, and by 1930, Mississippi had only six
black lawyers, and South Carolina had thirteen. In 1940, there
were just three blacks practicing law in Mississippi, and five in
South Carolina."

The pervasiveness of racial exclusion during this time period manifested
itself in an incident involving the American Bar Association during the
early part of the century. In 1912, the ABA unwittingly admitted three
Black lawyers. When informed of the error, the organization rapidly
passed a resolution rescinding admission.’” “[S]ince the settled practice
of the Association ha[d] been to elect only white men as members,”!”
the ABA referred the matter for a vote by the entire association. In dis-
cussing the matter, the Association quite openly declared that, from their
perspective, the matter posed “a question of keeping pure the Anglo-
Saxon race.”'*! Eventually, the ABA reached a compromise; it allowed
the three black lawyers to keep their memberships, but it imposed a new
requirement that all future applicants identify themselves by race.”

 

136.  éd. at 121.

137, See STEVENS, supra note 91, at 100 (“The schools that catered to immigrants apparently
were so low in the view of the elite that, despite their possible economic power, the associations were
quick to attempt to crush them.”}

138, Paul Finkelman, Not Only the Judge’s Robes Were Black: African-American Lawyers as
Social Engineers, 47 Staw L. Rev. 161, 182 (1994).

139. See AUERBACH, supra note 95, at 65.

140. Jd. at 65.

141. Jd. at 65-66.

142. See id. at 66.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 399

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1485

Of course, racism pervaded legal education during this time period
as well. Many law schools, particularly those in the South, formally de-
nied Blacks admission, and most others informally excluded them. As
late as 1939, thirty-four of the eighty-eight accredited law schools had
formal policies excluding Blacks.’ In 1925, Texas passed a law re-
stricting attendance at the University of Texas to white students, and the
law remained in effect until much later in the century.'* As late as
1938, the University of Missouri Law School continued to formally ex-
clude Black applicants on the grounds that “it was ‘contrary to the con-
stitution, laws and public policy of the State to admit a negro as a
student in the University of Missouri.’”'**

Although the University of Texas Law School formally excluded
Latinos by restricting their admission to white students only, law schools
did not need to adopt formal exclusionary policies for Chicanos and
other Latinos; pre-existing social and economic constraints alone were
sufficient to keep them out.'© Most Mexicans and Mexican Americans
lacked even the requisite high-school degree to apply to proprietary
schools, much less the more prestigious university-affiliated law
schools.’ The majority of newly arrived Mexicans in the Southwest and
California took jobs in agriculture, where they suffered sub-standard
living conditions, chronic underemployment and dramatically low
wages.'® A minority of Mexican immigrants entered the lower ranks of
industrial employment in the Northwest and the Midwest as unskilled
laborers, but few sought entry into the legal profession.'”

While racism against Latinos did not manifest itself as explicitly
during this time period in legal education, Mexican Americans and
Mexican nationals experienced in other ways much of the same nativist
and racist sentiment that had been directed against Blacks and immi-
grants in the legal profession. Although immigrants from Mexico nar-
rowly had escaped the limits on European immigration enacted in the
Immigration Restriction Acts of 1914 and 1924, during the 1920s,
Congress tried again to restrict Mexican immigration by eliminating

 

143. See id. at 183 (citing AUGUST MEIER, BLack HIsTORY AND THE HISTORICAL PROFESSION
1915-1980 50 (1988)).

144. See Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629, 631 n.1 (1950) (citing Texas statute).

145. Missouri ex ref. Gaines v. Canada, 305 U.S. 337, 343 (1938).

146, This information was collected during a telephone interview with Professor Michael Olivas
of the University of Houston Law School (August 21, 1996) fhereinafter, “Olivas Conversation”).

147, Id.

148. See Matt S. Meter & FELICIANO RIBERA, MEXICAN AMERICANS/AMERICAN MEXICANS:
From CoNQUISTADORS TO CHICANOS 123 (2d ed. 1993).

149. See id. at 121-22.
400 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL (Vol. 10:363

1486 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

Mexico’s exemption.” In 1926, Representative John C. Box of Texas
introduced a bill to remove the exemption. During Senate hearings on
the subject in 1928, Box publicly referred to Mexican workers as
“peonized, illiterate and unclean.”'' Support for Box’s effort to re-
move the exemption came from many sources, including teachers’ or-
ganizations and labor unions, as well as the more blatantly nativistic
“patriotic societies” and overtly racist groups.’

This, then, was the state of legal and social culture when law schools
first began to explore the use of competitive admissions standards. In
the early twentieth century, law schools first began to require some col-
lege attendance beyond a high school degree.” By 1921, elite schools
insisted on college degrees, while the less elite schools offered legal
education as part of their undergraduate curriculum.

Admissions programs also became selective for the first time in the
early 1920s, in conjunction with the demands of the case-law method of
instruction. Previously, most elite law schools had employed open ad-
missions policies at least for affluent males who had a college degree
and could pay their way.’** However, in the 1926-27 academic year,
Harvard failed 250 of its 700 first-year students, and other schools ex-
perienced similarly high rates of attrition, largely due to the introduc-
tion of the case-law method and the ensuing radical transformation of
legal education.'** To deal with these attrition rates, Yale began limiting
its entering classes to 100 students; no student was admitted unless he
had a C average, and transfer students needed a B average for admis-
sion.” After 1926, Yale applicants were required to submit a transcript
of their college record and letters of recommendations, to participate in
an interview and to take a classification test."* By 1928, Yale was re-
jecting over two-thirds of its applicants to maintain its limit of 100 new
students per year.'

The elite schools sought to limit the high rate of academic failures
in another way—through the use of aptitude testing." At Columbia,

 

150. See id. at 125-26.

151. See id.

152. See id. at 126-27.

153. See STEVENS, supra note 91, at 61.

154. See id.
155. See id. at 160-61.
156. See id.
187. See id.
158. See id.
159. See id.

160. See id.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 401

1997} BIAS AND MERIT 1487

Dean Harlan Fiske Stone initiated experimental testing for admissions in
1921, and in 1928 Columbia added aptitude testing to its newly selective
admissions process." In 1925, the year after enactment of the
Immigration Restriction Act of 1924, the West Publishing Company
published the first edition of its Ferson-Stoddard aptitude test, which was
used through three editions by a number of law schools.” Yale’s suc-
cess with aptitude testing encouraged other schools to explore the use of
psychometric testing."“ Through aptitude testing, elite law schools
solved the problem of admitting students who were not proficient in
case-method analysis. “Rather than cut back on the case method, the
schools cut back on the average student.”!

The use of aptitude testing continued to spread throughout the
1930s and 40s. In the late 1940s, three law schools formed an early
version of what is now the Law School Admisstons Council (““LSAC”)
to develop the Law School Aptitude Test (“LSAT”).'* Despite the al-
ready widespread use of aptitude testing among law schools, the first
version of the LSAT, developed in 1947, did not draw from previous
classroom testing experiences in legal education, but was based instead
upon the Pepsi-Cola Scholarship Test and tests developed for the United
States Navy.'©

Not surprisingly given the foregoing historical context, the
Navy tests and other aptitude tests of similar character had their
own foundation in racist and anti-immigrant sentiment.'” In The
Mismeasure of Man, Steven Jay Gould points out that the same racist
and nativist assumptions that had fueled support for anti-immigrant
legislation had created a demand for the development of ability

 

161. See id.

162. See Thomas O. White, LSAC/LSAS: A Brief History, 34 J. LeGat Epuc. 369, 369-70 (1984).
John Henry Wigmore concluded that the test had no substantial value in predicting success in law
school. See STEVENS, supra note 91, at 169 n.54 (citing Wigmore, Juristic Psychopoyemetrology—or
How ia Find Out Whether the Boy has the Makings of A Lawyer, 24 U. ILL. L. Rev. 454, 455 (1929)).

163. See STEVENS, supra note 91, at 169 & n.54.

164. fd. at 161,

165. See White, supra note 162, at 370.

166. fd. at 371.

167, Professor Richard Delgado has argued generally that law schools’ use of LSAT scores and
undergraduate grades is inextricably intertwined with the racist history of intelligence testing.
Delgado questions the validity of LSAT, in part because of the racist history of intelligence testing, an
argument that is taken up in more detail in the text accompanying notes 168-184 infra. See also
Delgado, Rodrigo’s Tenth Chronicle, supra note 9, at 1721, 1740-41.
402 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1488 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449
testing.'* Gould notes that ability testing was the practical (and inevita-
ble) offspring of biological determinism, an intellectual move- ment
then coming into its own, one that used genetic and evolutionary theory
to justify existing social, racial, and cultural arrangements.’

According to Gould, the pioneers of ability testing developed their
tests during the early twentieth century expressly to justify on biological
grounds certain a priori political and social assumptions about race and
ethnicity that were then in vogue. For example, Lewis M. Terman, who
developed the Stanford-Binet scale in 1916, dreamed of a “rational”
society that allocated professional opportunities by IQ scores.'” Henry
H. Goddard, who brought the Binet IQ scale to America, reified its re-
sults as concrete representations of innate intelligence. Goddard hoped
to use test scores “in order to recognize limits, segregate, and curtail
breeding to prevent further deterioration of an endangered American
stock, threatened by immigration from without and by prolific repro-
duction of its feeble-minded from within."

 

168. See generally GOULD, supra note 79; see also Delgado, Redrigo's Tenth Chronicle, supra
note 9, at 1740 (relying on Gould and others to argue that the SAT developed from a scientific
tradition intent on proving racial inferiority).

169. See GouLn, supra note 79, at 20.

170. Terman proclaimed that validating the hereditarian arguments about race and class were a
primary aim of his work. See id. at 189, Of the laboring class, he wrote that

{t]hey represent the level of intelligence which is very, very common among Spanish-
Indian and Mexican families of the Southwest and also among negroes, Their dullness
seems to be racial, or at least inherent in the family stocks from which they came. The fact

, that one meets this type with such extraordinary frequency among Indians, Mexicans, and

negroes suggests quite forcibly that the whole question of racial differences in mental traits
will have to be taken up anew... . Children of this group should be segregated in special
classes and be given instruction which is concrete and practical.... There is no possibility
at present of convincing society that they should not be allowed to reproduce, although from
a eugenic point of view they constitute a grave problem because of their unusually prolific
breeding.
fd. at 190-91. Terman later revised his analysis to explain group differences in terms of differences
in environment, See id. at 192.

171. Id. at 159. Goddard used Binet’s tests to screen incoming immigrants at Ellis Island for the
purpose of “detecting mental defectives,” and his initial results indicated that 83% of the Jews, 80%
of Hungarians, 79% of Italians and 87% of the Russians were “feeble-minded.” /d. at 164-66.
“Goddard rejoiced in the general tightening of standards for admission, (and}.... report{ed] that
deportations for mental deficiency increased 350 percent in 1913 and 570 percent in 1914... ‘due to
the untiring efforts of the physicians who were inspired by the belief that mental tests could be used
for the detection of feeble-minded aliens."” Jd. at 168 (citing Henry H. Goddard, Mental Tests and
the Immigrant, J. OF DELINQ. 2, 271 (1917)). Goddard went so far as to alter photographs to support
his argument that a stock of paupers in the pine barrens of New Jersey, whom he named the “kakos”
line, were genetically deficient. See id. at 171-72. Indeed, Goddard’s “Kallikak family” functioned
as the primal myth of the eugenics movement for several decades. See id. at 168. Goddard later
recanted to admit that he had set the ceiling of “moronity” too high. See id. at 172.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 403

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1489

Robert M. Yerkes, who persuaded the Army to test its recruits in
World War I, was perhaps the most responsible for developing aptitude
testing to perpetuate the notion that immigrants and Blacks were intel-
lectually inferior for genetic reasons. Yerkes’ Army data purported to
show that dark-skinned Southern and Eastern European immigrants
were less intelligent than the light-skinned Northern and Western
Europeans, and that the Negro was least intelligent of all. Yerkes’
data, along with data from other hereditarian ability testers, led directly
to passage of the Immigration Restriction Act of 1924, and to segrega-
tion in higher education:'”

Other propagandists used the army results to defend racial
segregation and limited access of blacks to higher education.
Comelia James Cannon, writing in the Atlantic Monthly in 1922,
noted that 89 percent of blacks had tested as morons and ar-
gued....“{that] the education of the whites and colored in
separate schools may have justification other than that created by
race prejudice... .”

But the army data had its most immediate and profound
impact upon the great immigration debate, then a major political
issue in America, and ultimately the greatest triumph of eugen-
ics.’

Carl Brigham, the man who eventually would become the head of
the Educational Testing Service, used the Yerkes data to argue publicly

 

172. See id. at 197.

173, See id. Leon Kamin has concluded that American psychologists were directly responsible
for influencing legislators to pass the Immigration Restriction Act of 1924. See generally Leon
Kamin, THE SCIENCE AND POLitics oF IQ (1974). See also James Reed, Robert M. Yerkes und the
Mental Testing Movement, in PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING AND AMERICAN SOcIETY 77 (Michael Sokal
ed., 1987),

Yerkes and Terman . .. shared with other American Galtonians the assumption that “civic
worth” or “mental ability” or “Q” were inherited biological capacities distributed unevenly
among classes and ethnic groups. They translated Galtonian ideology into harsh judgments
that fit all too well with the nativism and xenophobia of their culture. Thus, the efforts of
Yerkes and Terman to promote their discipline were greatly eased by the fact that their
technology of mental measurement reconciled equality of opportunity with inequality; they
provided numbers that seemed to confirm the “naturalness” of social class and racial caste.
Id.
174. GouLp, supra note 79, at 231. Gould quotes Henry Fairfield Osborn, trustee of Columbia
University, whose law school was the first to explore the use of aptitude tests:
I believe those tests were worth what the war cost, even in human life, if they served to
show clearly to our people the lack of intelligence in our country, and the degrees of
intelligence in different races who are coming to us, ina way which no one can say is the
result of prejudice. ...so in regard to many races and subraces in Europe we learned that
some which we had believed possessed of an order of intelligence perhaps superior to ours
were far inferior.

7d. (quoting Henry Fairfield Osborn).
404 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [{Vol. 10:363

1490 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

for restrictions on immigration and eugenic regulation of reproduc-
tion.'% As noted earlier, the LSAT in its earliest formulations drew di-
rectly from Navy tests and Pepsi scholarship tests, all variations of the
original IQ tests and the early Army data.'

Gould’s arguments about the racist and nativist sentiments under-
lying ability testing rest on more than the openly racist motivations of
the testers. Indeed, Gould argues that the very idea of ability testing it-
self rests on racist and nativist assumptions: the key structural compo-
nents of ability measurement are tied inextricably to social and cultural
desires to justify pre-existing distributions of wealth and power on the
basis of race and ethnicity!” According to Gould, the ability testers
embedded at least two a priori assumptions about race and ethnicity into
the methodology of ability testing."®

First, the ability-testers assumed that it was possible to reduce hu-
man capability in all its many forms to a unitary and measurable attrib-
ute—intelligence—and that such an attribute could be assigned a
number.’” Gould argues that the scientific method of converting hu-
man ability into a unitary number represented the social desire to justify

pre-existing political, racial, and cultural divisions among people:'®

We recognize the importance of mentality in our lives and wish
to characterize it, in part so that we can make the divisions and
distinctions among people that our cultural and political systems

 

175. See id. at 230. Brigham saw the threat to American intelligence as coming from both
immigrants and Blacks. “Running parallel with the movements of these European peoples, we have
the most sinister development in the history of this continent, the importation of the negro.” fd.
Brigham eventually recanted many of his conclusions, but his change of heart did not affect the
widespread acceptance of his theories. /d. at 232-34. See also Delgado, Radrigo’s Tenth Chronicle,
supra note 9, at 1743 (noting that Brigham relied on the Army test results).

176. See White, supra note 162, at 370-71. See also MALDEF Stupy, supra note 83, at 16
(discussing the historical development of the LSAT).

177. See GOULD, supra note 79, at 24-25.

178. See id.

179. See id.

180. See id. In a similar vein, Professor David Goldberg argues that Enlightenment notions of
morality, intellectual capacity, and Reason reflect the Western European desire to justify
appropriation of land and human resources on the grounds that savages, Negroes, and Southern and
Eastem Europeans all were inferior in those categories. See Davip GoLDBERG, RACIST CULTURE
15-40 (1991) (contending that the central tenets of Enlightenment moral philosophy, e.g., arguments
about irrationality or immorality, were constructed by social views on race and ethnicity, as illustrated
by philosophers’ writings on race); id. at 117-19 (arguing that Enlightenment Reason is racially and
culturally Western and Eurocentric, because it calls other cultures irrational for their “fail{ure] to
exhibit the values, metaphysical attitudes, epistemological principles, or cognitive values of
‘whitemales’”).
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 405

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1491

dictate. We therefore give the word ‘intelligence’ to this won-
drously complex and multifaceted set of human capabilities,'*!

Second, the hereditarian testers assumed that it was possible to rank
the scores obtained from measurement in some sort of serial fashion.'?
However, Gould describes the practice of ranking scores in ascending
order not as an example of precise measurement but as a function of the
Enlightenment metaphor of progress as upward movement on a linear
scale.'* In particular, according to Gould, the process of ranking com-
ported with “[mJetaphors of progress and gradualism [that] have been
among the most pervasive in Western thought.”'* Gould traces the
metaphor of progress to Darwinian assumptions about evolution, and
biological determinism in particular.

Notwithstanding Gould’s work and similar arguments from other
prominent scientists, intelligence and ability tests continue to be used to
screen potential applicants for educational and some employment pur-
poses. Certainly, commentators and testing organizations continue to
criticize overreliance on these tests, based in part on the racist historical
context surrounding their development. But having forgotten (or having
repressed) the history of law school admissions standards, law schools
continue to perpetuate the meritocratic myth that LSAT scores measure
ability to succeed in law school in objective, universal and race-neutral
ways.

The foregoing critical history of law school admissions illustrates
the general deconstructivist insight that merit standards necessarily defer
to and depend on subjective, socially constructed preferences about
what constitutes social value, in this case in the legal profession. More
relevantly, it demonstrates that legal professionals and educators con-
‘ structed preferences for social value, as well as the corresponding law
school admissions standards, at a time when the profession affirmatively
sought to exclude people based on their race and ethnicity. Far from
being colorblind, law school admissions standards were developed in a
context of racial and cultural exclusion, where those professional leaders
who developed those standards and values had achieved their leadership
status in large part because of their race. Far more troublingly, this criti-
cal history raises the possibility that law schools admissions standards

 

181. GouLp, supra note 79, at 24.

182. See id. at 24-25.

183. See id.

184. Id. at 24. In an astonishing tour de force, notable for its scope, Gould also debunks the
scientific methods used to develop intelligence testing, by re-analyzing the data and conclusions of
the early twentieth century intelligence testers. See id. at 24-29,
406 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL (Vol. 10:363

1492 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

may have been developed as part of a broader professional effort to ex-
clude on the basis of race and ethnicity.

Practically speaking, the history of law school admission may help
to explain the admissions standards’ disproportionate impact on groups
that were excluded from the legal profession at the relevant time. Given
the origins of aptitude testing, it is less likely to be mere coincidence
that contemporary academic selectivity measures continue to exclude
certain people of color disproportionately. For as long as the tests have
been administered, Blacks and Latinos have performed at levels signifi-
cantly below those of white applicants. For example, in 1992-93, 25.7%
of white applicants scored at or above 160 on the LSAT, compared to
11.5% of Latino applicants, 12.7% of American Indian applicants, and
2.9% of African-American applicants.'*

Beyond providing an alternative critical historical account of law
school admission, what theoretical implications might this deconstruc-
tivist account have for Farber and Sherry’s defense of objective merit?
Using the authors’ own argument that merit should be preferred over
bias, law schoo! admissions standards must be rejected as biased or race-
conscious. Farber and Sherry describe merit as valuable, objective, and
rational because it is “definable without reference to th[e] personal
characteristics” of race, gender, class, and religion. Conversely, they
condemn bias for being unjust, irrational, and “race-conscious.” Ac-
cording to Farber and Sherry’s own analysis, then, the conception of
merit in the legal profession must be rejected to the extent that it was
developed in ways that were related to race and ethnicity, i.e. because
merit is “race-conscious.”

Indeed, all merit standards are potentially subject to this critique.
AS the foregoing critical history illustrates, all merit standards necessar-
ily must defer to subjective, nonrational, culturally- and racially-specific
judgments about what constitutes social value. Many, if not all, of the
“numbers-based” standards might potentially be traceable to the racist
history of ability testing. But beyond an analysis of its specific history,
because merit depends on and defers to what is in effect a social bias,
merit actually reinscribes the qualities and characteristics of bias.
Indeed, merit can be redescribed as a socially acceptable bias for par-
ticular qualities and characteristics and values. Certainly, the radical

 

185. See Law ScHOOL Apmissions CouNcIL, 1990-95 NATIONAL STATISTICAL REPORT F-5
(1996). In 1994, the average LSAT score of African American applicants was a 149 as compared to
a 158 for Caucasian students. The average GPA of African American students was 2.91] as against
3.25 for Caucasian students. /d.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 407

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1493

critique of merit builds on this assumption to condemn certain merit
standards as favoring the groups that contructed them.

However, contrary to popular belief (and perhaps the views of some
critical theorists), the deconstructive argument does not collapse the dis-
tinction between merit and bias, to argue that all merit is bias. One could
also make the reverse deconstructive argument, that bias necessarily re-
inscribes the “rationality” of merit because biases can be said to be ra-
tionally related to a particular state of the world they seek to produce.

Suppose that society openly viewed the distribution of jobs and
other opportunities as a socially acceptable means by which certain
demographic groups could consolidate their power. It then would con-
stitute a merit-based selection to choose an employee or student on the
basis of their social status, race, class, or gender—these criteria would
have “merit” in light of the social value of power consolidation.
Similarly, affirmative action programs could be said to have “merit”
because they put members of previously excluded groups into positions
of power, a political goal that many defenders of affirmative action ar-
ticulate.’* Thus, bias depends on and defers to the idea of the “logic of
selection” fundamental to the definition of merit, in which a particular
characteristic or trait rationally predicts for a particular ability that has
social value, whether that be the ability to perform well under the
Socratic method or the ability to consolidate the power of dominant
groups.

The possibility of deconstructing the distinction between merit and
bias from either direction reveals the “differance” between the arbi-
trary, nonrational social choices associated with bias and the rational
objectivity associated with merit. Merit differs from bias, but the way
merit is constructed through judgments about social value necessarily
reinscribes the characteristics of bias. Bias differs from merit, but given
a particular social value—e.g., the perpetuation of white supremacy—
selection based on race or ethnicity meritoriously and logically relates
to achieving that social value.

Rationality or logic cannot fully explain distributions according to
merit. Nor can merit standards be explained fully as the irrational
exercise of social power. Deconstructive practice reveals the limits of
both “rationality” and the exercise of social power in explaining social
practices like merit selection or biased selection. Deconstruction “sets in
train a process of thought which shuttles productively from one

 

186. See Kennedy, supra note 9.
408 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1494 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

standpoint to the other.’"*’ At the same time, it undermines and dis-
places any stable meaning for merit or bias as opposites, by redescribing
bias as a form of merit, and merit as a form of bias. Thus, it reveals the
choice of what we choose to call merit and what gets called bias to be a
political one, subject to discussion and debate.

I
ADDITIONAL THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS

A. Critical Historical Method: An Alternative Line of Inquiry

Whatever one thinks of deconstructive practice and difference, the
original question posed by Farber and Sherry remains. Given that merit
standards were designed to keep Southern and Eastern Europeans, Jews,
and African Americans out of power, how does one explain the dispro-
portionate success of Jews and some groups of Asians? Farber and
Sherry primarily focus their attention on alternative answers that are
Anti-Semitic, but they also allude to two other potentially acceptable
(i.e., not Anti-Semitic) possibilities, neither of which they explore in
depth. First, the authors concede that for Jews and some Asian groups,
the standard might “simply [happen] by chance to correspond to
something in their own culture.” Alternatively, they suggest, “these
groups might have mastered the dominant culture as a response to their
subordinated status.”" Farber and Sherry do not fully develop either
alternative, both of which explain Jewish or Asian success as cultural
“adaptation.”

Indeed, one could imagine such an argument, more fully fleshed
out than the authors’ description, that Jewish or some Asian cultures
have some traditions or emphases—perhaps a history of achievement in
the legal profession, an embrace of Enlightenment values, an emphasis
on formal education, a mastery of written texts, rules of law or religion,
or other adaptations related to their diaspora—that might explain why

 

187, Norris, supra note 16, at 27.

188. Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 880.

189, Id.

190. Farber and Sherry find this argument to be Anti-Semitic, in one sense, because it implicates
Jews in the blame for constructing racist standards (which in the case of law school admissions
standards seems rather doubtful), or at least for taking advantage of them. See FARBER & SHERRY,
BEYOND ALL REASON, supra note 2, at 72. Alternatively, the argument is Anti-Semitic because any
radical proposal for reform would take away the fruits of Jewish success as unfairly earned. See
Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 881. The authors find the adaptation
argument to necessarily suggest that Jewish and Asian cultures are parasitic and inauthentic. /d. See
also FARBER & SHERRY, BEYOND ALL REASON, supra note 2, at 74.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 409

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1495

these groups have beaten the dominant culture at its own game in par-
ticular professions or educational settings.'*!

The authors ultimately reject the possibility of this argument, or
any derivation of it, for two reasons. First, Farber and Sherry contend
that the “white Gentiles might allow Jews and Asians to succeed, but
they would not allow them to surpass. A ‘gate built by a white male he-
gemony’ is not likely to open wider for Jews and Asians than for mem-
bers of the dominant culture.” Second, and in the alternative, Farber
and Sherry respond that any radical critique of merit that emphasizes its
cultural or ideological situatedness is nihilistic."

Whether or not the charge of nihilism sticks—an argument taken
up in more detail in the next sectton—the authors do not appear to have
undertaken any sort of historical inquiry, conventional, critical, or oth-
erwise, to answer the question about Jewish or Asian success. Farber and
Sherry instead focus on hypothetical explanations that they then attack
as anti-Semitic or anti-Asian.

As the critical history of law school admissions suggests, however, it
might have been more productive for Farber and Sherry to explore the
Jewish/Asian question by conducting a critical historical inquiry. The
authors could have explored how Jews and Asians did or did not par-
ticipate in the creation of admissions standards, how they initially fared
during the adoption of admissions criteria, and when and how they first
began to succeed under such standards (a project that this Article does
not take up). Whatever the results of such an historical inquiry, the
authors’ ahistorical comparisons between groups are of little help, be-
cause, as the foregoing discussion suggests, merit cannot be assessed in
abstract, “objective” terms.

In any event, Farber and Sherry’s argument is premised on the as-
sumption that members of the dominant group consciously and actively
conspired to exclude all groups other than their own, by constructing
intentionally unfair standards rather than neutral, fair standards. The
authors’ argument does not necessarily apply to the weaker formulation
of the radical critique presented in this Article, which describes all merit
standards as culturally and historically situated, and does not necessarily

 

191, Though beyond the scope of this article, there is some suggestion that the data with regard
to Asian Americans in law schools and Jaw school faculty positions may not conform to Farber and
Sherry’s more general argument about Asian American success. See Robert §. Chang, Toward an
Asian American Legal Scholarship: Critical Race Theory, Post-Structuralism, and Narrative Space,
81 Cauir. L. Rev. 1241 (1988).

192, FarBER & SHERRY, BEYOND ALL REASON, supra note 2, at 71 (emphasis in original).

193. The nihilism argument is taken up in Part IV, infra.
410 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1496 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

formulate merit standards as the product of conscious conspiracy on the
part of members of the dominant group.

Of course, this Article does raise the possibility of a stronger argu-
ment, i.e., that merit standards in law school admissions were part of a
broader structural, perhaps explicitly conscious effort to exclude Blacks
and immigrant groups on the basis of perceived racial, ethnic, and cul-
tural differences. However, even the stronger version of the argument
does not negate the possibility that Jews or Asians, as time passed, would
come to surpass the dominant culture’s performance at its own game,
for historical or social or cultural reasons that do not necessarily hold
true for other groups with different histories and cultures. Nor does that
explanation presume that Jewish and Asian groups have become as-
similated culturally into American culture—to the contrary, there is
much to indicate that, in conjunction with their success under conven-
tional merit standards, Jews and Asians continue to enjoy distinctive and
rich cultural and historical traditions. Rather, the radical critique is
meant to point out the ways in which al/ merit standards are necessarily
historically and culturally specific, and to argue that all groups ought to
have the opportunity to participate in the development of such stan-
dards.

B. A Practical Application of Deconstruction:
Shifting the Burden of Proof

This section suggests ways in which litigators could make use of the
deconstructivist insights of this article in litigating against purely num-
bers-based law school admissions standards. As noted earlier, decon-
struction merely clears the way for necessary political discussions about
what gets called merit or bias. Although this Article does not develop
those political arguments, the practical task of creating litigation tools
assumes a prior, political commitment to increase the numbers of Blacks
and Latinos/as in law schools. Thus, this section touches on those argu-
ments briefly.

It is possible, drawing from the critical history of law school admis-
sions, to marshal at least two persuasive political arguments for affirma-
tive action in law schools. First, the critical history of law school
admissions standards raises the possibility that law schools developed
those standards, and more particularly the LSAT, as part of a broader
intentional effort to exclude Blacks and immigrants from the legal pro-
fession. To the extent that we find arguments about intentional dis-
crimination politically persuasive, we should respond to evidence of
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 411

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1497

possible intentional discrimination in the creation of these standards by
overhauling the standards or admitting people of color via affirmative
action programs.

The critical history of law school admissions also supports a second
political argument from fairness, this one a more process-oriented ar-
gument than the last. Duncan Kennedy argues persuasively that, to the
extent certain groups were affirmatively excluded via merit standards
and explicit racism from the legal profession, they did not have an op-
portunity to participate in the initial development of merit standards.'*
Therefore, affirmative action programs are justified on the grounds that
they put people of color in positions of leadership where they eventu-
ally will be able to serve as intelligentsia for communities of color, and
participate in decisions about continuing or revising standards of
merit.

Assuming the persuasiveness of these pro-affirmative action politi-
cal arguments, how might deconstructive insights about merit and bias
translate into practical litigation tools? Using standard  anti-
discrimination arguments (or slightly modified ones), litigators might be
able to use deconstructive insights to challenge straight numbers-based
admissions procedures like the SP-1 policy recently mandated in
California universities. While courts are not likely to find persuasive the
argument that all merit standards are a form of bias, they may find more
persuasive the argument that law school admissions standards were de-
veloped in the context of, or for the purpose of, racial exclusion. These
radical claims in support of affirmative action and against admissions
policies like SP-1 certainly can be fit into the conventional legal vo-
cabulary’s distinctions between merit and bias.

Currently, standard anti-discrimination law recognizes that reme-
dying past discrimination constitutes a compelling state interest of suffi-
cient weight to justify affirmative action programs.'® Standard anti-
discrimination doctrine also recognizes that the contextual history of a
selection procedure is important in assessing whether the procedure has
been used with an intent to discriminate.’ The deconstructivist history
of law school admissions provides material for both of those arguments.

First, to the extent that litigation involves defending an affirmative
action program in a law school, such programs can be justified on the

 

194. Kennedy, supra note 9, at 712-13 (arguing that to compete effectively for wealth and
power, minority groups must have intelligentsia who participate in the production of knowledge.)

195. See id.

196. Shaw v. Hunt, 116 S. Ct. 1894, 1902 (1996).

197. U.S. v. Fordice, 505 U.S. 717, 734 (1992).
412 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1498 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

grounds that they are remedying the past discriminatory activity em-
bedded in law school admissions standards themselves, whether the dis-
crimination consists of developing the standards for the purpose of
excluding people of color, or excluding them from the profession in a
way that prevented their participation in developing merit standards.
Although the United States Supreme Court does not recognize reme-
dying industry or profession-wide discrimination, that limitation has
never been applied to cases which justify an affirmative action program
on the grounds that the selection process itself is intrinsically and struc-
turally discriminatory.'* Using such an argument, defense attorneys in
Hopwood v. Texas’” might have coupled the foregoing general histori-
cal narrative with evidence of specific institutional history as well as evi-
dence of disproportionate impact of the law school’s admissions
process, to argue that Texas’s affirmative action programs were justified
by the a compelling state interest in remedying past discrimination.”

Likewise, critical history could also be used as an offensive weapon
in challenging the validity of pure numbers-based admissions standards
like SP-1 under a Title VI intentional discrimination challenge.
Standard anti-discrimination law under Title VI looks to the history sur-
rounding a selection procedure to determine whether the procedure was
used with the intent to discriminate. In United States v. Fordice, the
United States Supreme Court condemned historically white Mississippi
colleges’ admissions policies relating to use of the American College
Test (ACT) on the grounds that they were traceable to a de jure system
of discrimination, were originally adopted for a discriminatory purpose,
and continued to have discriminatory effects.” Likewise, a court could
find that the history of affirmative discrimination surrounding the birth
of law school admission standards constituted a de jure system of
discrimination, and that the LSAT and grade point average admissions
standards are traceable to that time period and were originally adopted
for a discriminatory purpose.

Defenders of the SP-1 process likely will argue that evidence of
historical discrimination does not prove that the standards themselves

 

198. See Croson v. City of Richmond, 488 U.S. 469, 497-98 (1989).

199. Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F.3d 932 (Sth Cir. 1996).

200. The defense could also have made use of an affirmative action counternarrative to argue
that the program served the “compelling state interest” of affording previously excluded groups the
opportunity to participate in constructing merit standards, thereby ensuring that they will not be
systematically excluded from professional opportunities. See id. at 940, 944-48 (requiring a
compelling state interest to justify use of affirmative action in law school admissions because the
program is race-conscious).

201. 505 U.S. 717, 734 (1992).
1998] _ BIAS AND MERIT 413

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1499

were, or are currently, the product of discriminatory intent, particularly
if the LSAT has been modified over the years. Further, LSAT defenders
are likely to argue that the facts in Fordice are inapposite, since Missis-
sippi had formally been held liable by the judicial system for operating
a de jure system of segregation.

Acknowledging the potential doctrinal difficulties of such an ar-
gument, this Article proposes the creation of a new doctrinal category,
“intentional impact,” which would combine elements of disparate im-
pact doctrine with elements from intentional discrimination, or disparate
treatment, doctrine. Under an “intentional impact” theory, a party
could combine evidence of an industry or profession’s discriminatory
intent in adopting or developing certain selection standards with current
evidence of disproportionate impact, to create a prima facie case of in-
tentional impact discrimination. Upon a prima facie showing of inten-
tional impact, the burden of proof would then shift towards proponents
of the merit standard at issue to prove, beyond any showing of educa-
tional or business necessity, that the standards either were not developed
in the context of racial exclusion, or did not produce a disparate impact
on historically excluded groups.”

Our suspicions are certainly raised when we discover that a par-
ticular merit standard, like the LSAT, was developed in a context of ra-
cial exclusion, and possibly for the explicit purpose of racial exclusion.
We become more suspicious when we are confronted with evidence of
the standard’s current disproportionate impact on people of color. Just
as the burden is shifted after an initial showing of disparate impact in
Title VI and VII cases,™ so too should the burden shift in intentional

 

202. Id. at 734.

203. In Village of Arlington Heights v. Metro, Housing Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 265-66 (1977),
the Supreme Court held that in order to mount a constitutional challenge on the basis of disparate
impact, plaintiffs would have to show some evidence of intentional purpose in adopting the facially
neutral government action at issue. In that case, the Court held that in determining whether a facially
neutral government action was motivated by a discriminatory purpose, a trial court should consider
the historical background of the decision as an evidentiary source, in conjunction with discriminatory
impact. /d. at 267. The proposed “intentional impact” category similarly would permit evidence of the
historical background of a decision and events leading up to it, but would require the evidentiary
burden to shift on a showing of historically suspect circumstances coupled with a disproportionate
impact.

204. While Title VI itself, like the Fourteenth Amendment, bars only intentional discrimination,
the regulations promulgated pursuant to Title VI may validly proscribe actions having a disparate
impact on groups protected by the statute, even if those actions are not intentionally discriminatory.
See Guardians Ass'n v. Civil Service Comm'n of New York City, 463 U.S. 582, 584 n.2 (1983);
Alexander v. Choate, 469 U.S. 287, 292-94 (1985); Georgia State Conference of Branches of
NAACP vy, State of Georgia, 775 F.2d 1403, 1417 (11th Cir. 1985). Upon a showing that an
educational admissions policy has a disparate impact upon protected groups, the burden of proof then
414 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1500 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

impact cases, to prove that a particular merit standard is truly
“colorblind.” A showing of educational necessity would not be
enough, because, as with law school admissions, the educational values
and practices of the institutions (like the case-law method) may be as
much a product of industry-wide discrimination as the standards them-
selves.

The intentional impact litigation strategy focuses the court’s atten-
tion beyond the merit standards to the social values behind those stan-
dards, and the relation between those values and race and ethnicity. To
the extent that contemporary antidiscrimination law insists on using col-
orblindness and formal equal opportunity as benchmarks for acceptable
ways of distributing resources, those who would defend merit standards
should bear the burden of proving their fairness and equality after-a
prima facie showing of unfairness in both their origins and their con-
temporary application.

No doubt Farber and Sherry would object to the foregoing pro-
posal, most likely on theoretical grounds. In keeping with their conser-
vative pragmatic tradition,° Farber and Sherry place the burden of
proof on critics of merit, to show that the standards are not race-neutral,
fair, just, or equal.

[W]e should be receptive to but critical of challenges to current
conceptions of merit. Contemporary standards should receive a
rebuttable presumption of validity, and the burden ought to be
on challengers to show why particular aspects of those standards
ought to be eliminated, amended or expanded.”

Asked to explain why merit standards disproportionately exclude
applicants of color, Farber and Sherry contend that the simplest
and therefore most likely answer is that standards are applied in

 

shifts to the defendant, who must show that a selection procedure is justified based on some
“educational necessity,” or “business necessity” in the case of employer discrimination under Tide
VII. See generally E.E.O.C. v. Steamship Clerks Union, 48 F.3d 594, 602 (Ist Cir. 1995).
205. Professor William Eskridge labels Farber and Sherry’s prescriptions for social change
“conservative pragmatism.” ,
Farber and Sherry’s conception of ‘practical reasoning’ posits that we do not discover truth
by logical deduction from grand theoretical premises, but rather create truth as we devise
ideas to make sense of our experiences. In explaining this conception of truth, they
specifically invoke the philosophy of [Jamesian] American pragmatism. [This philosophy]
suggests that we change our views slowly in response to new experiences [by] preserv[ing)
the older stock of truths with a minimum of modification, stretching them just enough to
make them admit [the new idea], but conceiving that in ways as familiar as the case leaves
possible.
William N. Eskridge, Ir., Gaylegal Narratives, 46 Stan. L. Rev. 607, 612-13 (1994) (quoting William
James).
206. Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 883.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 415

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1501

discriminatory ways. “We do not contend that the current concept of
merit is perfect, nor do we deny that discrimination against some groups
has denied them their due rewards. Belief in merit is not incompatible
with acknowledging that societal standards can be applied in a discrimi-
natory manner.” Thus, according to the authors, bias is not contained
within the standards themselves, but is external, identifiable, and remov-
able.

Farber and Sherry might similarly separate merit standards’ dis-
criminatory past from the question of whether the standards are, never-
theless, theoretically valid or useful in predicting law school success.
Farber and Sherry likely would contend that even if the standards were
developed.in the context of racial exclusion, such inauspicious begin-
nings do not necessarily negate the idea that the standards now predict
law school success with some accuracy.2% Alternatively, Farber and
Sherry might argue that even if contemporary law school admissions
standards are discriminatory, it is still theoretically possible to imagine
merit standards that are not tainted by bias.

But even a conservative pragmatist would find it difficult to argue
that both the discriminatory history of merit standards and their current
disproportionate impact on current applicants are the result of mere dis-
criminatory application or unlucky coincidence. At the very least, a
conservative pragmatist’s suspicions would be aroused that those merit
standards which currently produce disparate impact and also were de-
veloped in a context of racial exclusion are likely to be discriminatory,
not just in their application but in their very structure.

IV
Is THE RADICAL CONSTRUCTIVIST CRITIQUE NIHILISTIC?

Anticipating the possibility that there are explanations for Jewish
and some Asian groups’ successes that do not rest on Anti-Semitism,

 

207. Id. at 857. See also id. at 866. ( “If success is influenced by merit, racial differences must
be attributable to nature, nurture, or discrimination (or some combination of these). Either the less
successful groups are born with fewer of the traits that lead to ‘good’ performance, or their
upbringing or environment discourages the development of those traits, or they possess the same traits
but are denied equal recognition and reward.”).
208. In Rodrigo’s Tenth Chronicle, fictional character Lazlo Kowalski defends merit testing
against the racist history of the SAT:
I’m not sure what it has to do with today. No one advocates those distasteful notions any
more.... The test may have been biased back then, and maybe a regatta or two creeps in
even now. But ETS has professional test validators, experts who comb the items for bias.
And surely you cannot say there are no differences in legal aptitude or ability.”

Delgado, supra note 9, at 1742. :
416 ; LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1502 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

Farber and Sherry reach for their weapon of last resort: they argue that
the radical critique of merit is nihilistic.

To say that standards of merit are arbitrary is to say, as
Duncan Kennedy says about conflicting paradigms, that no
meta-criteria exist for evaluating them or judging between them.
If so, then reason can play no role in accepting or rejecting these
standards, for there are no criteria to which reason can appeal.
But this approach also makes it difficult to criticize the status
quo.

We are then back to force as the only arbiter (other than
chance)...

In Sherry’s article The Sleep of Reason, she repeats and extends
this nihilism argument, contending that the radical critique promotes
relativism and precludes us from criticizing the perpetrators of another
Holocaust, or refuting those who deny that the Holocaust ever hap-
pened.” Exhibiting a pragmatist’s faith in reason, Sherry argues that
“even if there is no epistemology unconnected to power relationships,
we tend to—and perhaps we must—behave as if there were.”””

As Farber and Sherry acknowledge, the portrayal of deconstructive
practice as nihilistic or Anti-Semitic is nothing new.’” Critics repeatedly
have raised the same charge against Paul de Man, a noted deconstruc-
tionist, who was discovered to have written essays for a Belgian newspa-
per in which he repudiated Jewish influence in literature.” DeMan’s
detractors pointed to what appeared to be pro-Nazi sentiment in his
work to argue that deconstructive practice was linked to moral relativism
and Nazism.

The nihilism argument also has been raised more generally,”
against both deconstructive practice and the so-called “irrationalist”
wing of Critical Legal Studies.” Guyora Binder articulates the structure
of the nihilism argument against deconstruction:

 

209. Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 880-81.

210. See Sherry, supra note 80, at 483-84.

241. Id. at 473.

212. See Farber & Sherry, Radical Critique of Merit, supra note 2, at 879 & n.147.

213. See Paul de Man, The Jews in Contemporary Literature, LESoir, Mar. 4, 1941, cited in
Davip LEHMAN, SIGNS OF THE TIMES: DECONSTRUCTION AND THE FALL OF PAUL DE MAN 269-71
(1991).

214. See Balkin, supra note 33, at 1670 (citing JoHN Extis, AGAINST DECONSTRUCTION (1989)
as an example of argument that deconstructing conceptual distinctions leads to end of meaningful
discourse and intellectual discussion).

215. See Joseph William Singer, The Player and the Cards: Nihilism and Legal Theory, 94 YALE
L.J. 1, 48 (1984) (observing that the crux of the nihilism argument against Critical Legal Studies is that
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 417

1997} BIAS AND MERIT 1503

The bases for this suspicion of deconstruction are threefold.
First, because deconstruction shows every argument to contain its
own opposite, it seems nihilistic. Second, because deconstruction
is said to ‘annihilate the subject’—to deny the individual identi-
ties of authors and of characters—it seems to deny individual re-
sponsibility for evil. Third, because it exposes the futility of
efforts to deny loss, contradiction and violence, deconstruction
seems to urge acceptance of their necessity. Perhaps an
‘antihumanist’ philosophy that attempts to annihilate the subject
sees no great loss in the annihilation of subjects.”

Similarly, Farber and Sherry’s argument from nihilism assumes that
violence is inevitable once we concede that reason cannot adjudicate
neutrally between interpretations.

However, Farber and Sherry’s argument has potency only if reason
can indeed fulfill its own promises of adjudicating fairly and neutrally
between competing interpretations.”” In fact, the authors’ faith in rea-
son as a neutral arbiter of competing interpretations is metaphysically
misplaced. Reason and merit are culturally and ideologically specific
constructs that depend on a particular ideological discourse and can
adjudicate only for those who subscribe to that ideology. Nor can rea-
son fulfill the promise of providing objectively “correct” rational
choices. Indeed, a scrupulous application of reason would not have pre-
vented the Holocaust. While much of the Nazi scientific reasoning may
have been flawed, the Holocaust was not merely bad science or bad rea-
soning.” Condemning the Holocaust necessitates overtly political
commitments to compassion, empathy for suffering, and outrage at the
exercise of power over innocent victims on the basis of their ethnicity.

Critical legal scholar Joseph Singer points out the fallacy in the no-
tion that reason alone, as a closed system, will generate “correct”
theoretical choices between competing alternatives.” Rather, Singer

 

by rejecting a rational method of adjudicating value conflicts, critical legal scholarship removes
certainty in all things).

216. Guyora Binder, Representing Nazism: Advocacy and Identity at the Trial of Klaus Barbie, 98
Yare LJ. 1321, 1377 (1989).

217, Otherwise the authors are merely fooling themselves into thinking that nihilism does not
currently rule, an option that Sherry appears to favor. See Sherry, supra note 80, at 455-57, 483-84
(arguing that even if we don’t believe that reason offers a neutral way of choosing between solutions,
we should act as if it does).

218. “What protects us against Nazism is not the belief that reason can prove that it is wrong.
What protects us is outrage.” Singer, supra note 215, at 55.

219. See id. at 60.

Theory is useful to the extent that it articulates what we value. Since our values conflict,
legal theories express our competing values. We ‘draw a line’ between competing
418 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1504 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 85:1449

argues that, on an everyday basis, people make most important choices
intuitively, on the basis of preconceived commitments to their ideologi-
cal political and moral values.” He counsels that we should continue to
choose based on our political and moral intuitions and convictions
about “how we should live” and “what we should do.””” Political con-
versations between competing perspectives must still take place: we must
argue, present competing and incompatible bodies of evidence, and try
to change someone’s mind, rather than rely on cool reason as a univer-
sally valid and objective arbiter to make our decisions for us. The radi-
cal critique of merit eliminates the conversation-stopper of claiming that
a particular position on affirmative action, for example, is right because
it reflects objectively the true nature of merit, economic efficiency and
the operation of the marketplace.

Singer’s critics answer that our political commitments are not de-
void of reason; we use reason to make intuitive political and moral
choices, as is evident in the self-reflective scrutiny and revision to which
people subject their moral choices.” Commentators also point out that
most policy choices contain reasoned conclusions about cause and ef-
fect. Of course their claims are correct, but any privilege that reason
might enjoy immediately is undermined by its deference to the preex-
isting nonrational political choices that are embedded within rational
discourse. As with all relational binary opposites, reason and intuition,
cause and effect, are entwined in an illogical relationship of difference.

Contrary to Farber and Sherry’s assertion, as the foregoing demon-
strates, reason plays an absolutely essential role in deconstruction, which
uses rigorous logic and reason to expose the limits of rationality?” In
fact, it is only because Derrida “respects the exigencies” of the rational

 

principles and then create a theory to describe where we chose to place the line. But the
theory does not itself reconcile those values or tell us where to draw the line. It cannot
because it is something we made up to express those values and the ‘line’ between them.

Id.

220. See id.

221. See id. at 62.

When people decide whether to get married, to have children, to go to law school... they

do not follow a procedure that generates, by itself, an answer. They do think long and hard

about what they want in life; they imagine what their lives would be like if they were to

follow one path rather than another... and in the end, they make a decision... . Legal

decisions—deciding a case, voting on a statute, electing a president—are no different ... .
Id.

222. See, e.g., John Stick, Can Nihilism be Pragmatic?, 100 Harv. L. Rev. 332, 398 (1986)
(“Singer thinks we just choose our moral and political stands, and that rationality applied to morals
can be only rationalization after the fact.”).

223. It is for this reason that Drucilla Comell calls deconstruction “the philosophy of the limit.”
DrucILLa CORNELL, THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE Limit 1 (1992).
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 419

1997} BIAS AND MERIT 1505

or philosophical argument right up to its limits, that he is able to expose
the “constitutive blind spots” that exist in those discourses.’ Derridean
deconstructive practice—as opposed to the descriptions of deconstruc-
tion offered by anti-Enlightenment or post-analytical thinkers like Jean
Baudrillard or Richard Rorty—adheres very closely to conventional
standards of analytic precision, rigor and consistency.”

Contrary to much of postmodernist thinking, Derridean decon-
structive practice does not support an argument that all reason is politi-
cal, that all concept is metaphor, or that all merit is bias. Indeed,
Derridean deconstructive practice is designed to expose the circular re-
lationship of mutual dependence and difference between the two terms
in a conceptual opposition: reason defers to and depends on political
intuition, and at the same time differs from political intuition. Merit de-
fers to, and differs from, bias, and vice versa.“ Deconstructive practice
does not permanently reverse the hierarchical ordering in the opposition
between merit and bias; instead, it points out the circular and paradoxi-
cal relation between the two concepts.

Thus, deconstructive practice itself does not, and is not meant to,
adjudicate between competing interpretations. Deconstruction clears the
way for necessary political discussions by demonstrating that what ap-
pears to be natural or objective is actually a function or pre-existing
contingent categories in political and ideological discourse. But decon-
structive practice cannot and does not mean to provide new founda-
tional answers. “[Deconstruction] can displace a hierarchy
momentarily, it can shed light on otherwise hidden dependencies of
concepts, but it cannot propose new hierarchies of thought or substitute
new foundations.”

The deconstructive reading presented in this article, to the extent
that it draws directly from Farber and Sherry’s rationalist argument, can

 

224, See id.; see also Curran, supra note 31, at 15 (deconstructive practice “is as scientific in
rigor and logic as .. . structuralism”).

225. See Norris, supra note 16, at 146.

226. See id. at 142-43.

Derrida’s mode of argument...is very far from endorsing the vulgar-deconstructionist
view that ‘all concepts come down to metaphors in the end’... .. Derrida’s purpose. . . is
precisely to deny that we could ever effect such a straightforward reversal of
priorities . .. . For, quite simply, there is no possibility of discussing metaphor—or defining
its attributes, its difference from ‘literal’ usage, or its problematic role within the texts of
philosophy—without falling back on some concept of metaphor, a concept that will always
have been ‘worked’ or elaborated in advance by the discourse of philosophic reason. Thus
‘each time that a rhetoric defines metaphor, not only is a philosophy implied, but also a
conceptual network in which philosophy itself has been constituted.
Id. (citation omitted} (emphasis in original),
227. J.M. Balkin, Deconstructive Practice and Legal Theory, 96 YALE L.J. 743, 786 (1987).
420 LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 10:363

1506 CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (Vol. 85:1449

be tested by conventional standards of analytical rigor and precision.
But Singer is also right when he suggests that society must choose be-
tween the current picture of merit and bias in law school admissions and
the critical historical account offered by this Article. We must choose,
based on our intuitions and political convictions, what we consider im-
portant in distributing opportunities for legal education and what is con-
sistent with our own experiences of the social world.

CONCLUSION

Critical Race Theory scholars have notéd that deconstructionist
critical theory is theoretically in tension, and may in fact be incompati-
ble, with Critical Race Theory.”* Angela Harris has pointed out the ten-
sion within Critical Race Theory between its theoretical critique of
purportedly race-neutral legal institutions and its commitment toward
fashioning an affirmative program of racial emancipation, an effort
which she calls “reconstruction.””’ Indeed, Critical Race Theory
evolved at least in part because Critical Race scholars believed that
Critical Legal Studies’ general emphasis on theoretical critique, and use
of deconstructionist methods in particular, served to undercut the possi-
bility for practical transformation?”

This Article demonstrates that deconstruction can be used to argue
for practical, transformative change. By exposing how legal concepts
like merit defer to, and possess the qualities of, bias, the Article suggests
ways in which litigators can make use of deconstructive interpretations
of merit to undercut the assumption that merit standards simply reflect
objective, race-neutral measurements of social value. As a strategic
matter, with its emphasis on critical historical inquiry, deconstruction
can produce critical historical accounts, such as the law school

 

228. See Richard Delgado, The Ethereal Scholar: Does Critical Legal Studies Have What
Minorities Want?, 22 Harv.C.R.-C.L. L. Rev. 301, 313 (1987) (arguing that poorly developed positive
program would not serve the needs of minorities); Angela P. Harris, Foreword: A Jurisprudence of
Reconstruction, 82 Catir, L. Rev. 741, 752 (1994) (arguing that postmodernism and second-wave
Critical Legal Studies does not sit easily with normative recommendations that assume the possibility
of reasoning through to solutions); Patricia J. Williams, Alchemical Notes: Reconstructed Ideals From
Deconstructed Rights, 22 Harv.C.R.-C.L. L. Rev. 401, 404-06 (1987) (detailing discomfort with
Cnitical Legal Studies’ rejection of rights).

229. Harris, supra note 228, at 752; see also Robert L. Hayman, Jr. The Color of Tradition:
Critical Race Theory and Postmodern Constitution Traditionalism, 30 Harv. C.R.-C.L. L. REv. 57, 69-
70 (1995) (contending that an affirmative program is not consistent with postmodern theory).

230. See Harris, supra note 228, at 751; see also Harlon L. Dalton, The Clouded Prism, 22
Harv.C.R.-C.L, L. Rev. 435, 436-37.
1998] BIAS AND MERIT 421

1997] BIAS AND MERIT 1507

admissions narrative, that are consistent with our political and moral
commitments to racial emancipation.

In particular, deconstructivist insights and strategies can be used to
expose the overtly political commitments behind a defense of merit like
Farber and Sherry’s. Under the lens of a deconstructive critique, Farber
and Sherry’s conventional distinction between merit and bias no longer
seems self-evident because merit necessarily defers to the social bias it
seeks to exclude. Thus, we are left with the task of reconstructing new
meanings for merit by having difficult political conversations about
what constitutes social value in the legal profession, whether exams ac-
curately predict the ability of a practicing lawyer, whether case law in-
struction or practical clinical instruction is more appropriate for certain
kinds of law, and finally, whether we want our law schools to become
resegregated under an admissions process that looks only at the number
of a person’s LSAT score and GPA, rather than at the content of her
character.”

 

231. See Singer, supra note 215, at 55.
LA RAZA LAW JOURNAL

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW
