® Check for updates

 

Methods
Qualitative Health Research
e 2020, Vol. 30(5) 783-792
“Everything Is Perfect, and We Have © Theatr) 2013
a, 1 1 itl sasepub,com/ournale-permissions

No Problems”: Detecting and Limiting sgepub.comjoural-permissons

s s tis s s s s journals.sagepub.com/home/qhr
Social Desirability Bias in Qualitative SSAGE
Research

Nicole Bergen'® and Ronald Labonté’

Abstract

Many qualitative research studies acknowledge the possibility of social desirability bias (a tendency to present reality
to align with what is perceived to be socially acceptable) as a limitation that creates complexities in interpreting
findings. Drawing on experiences conducting interviews and focus groups in rural Ethiopia, this article provides
an empirical account of how one research team developed and employed strategies to detect and limit social
desirability bias. Data collectors identified common cues for social desirability tendencies, relating to the nature of
the responses given and word choice patterns. Strategies to avoid or limit bias included techniques for introducing
the study, establishing rapport, and asking questions. Pre-fieldwork training with data collectors, regular debriefing
sessions, and research team meetings provided opportunities to discuss social desirability tendencies and refine
approaches to account for them throughout the research. Although social desirability bias in qualitative research
may be intractable, it can be minimized.

Keywords
qualitative research; social desirability bias; Ethiopia; methodology

Introduction for answering a question in a particular way has links to
rational choice theory—that is, to maximize utility and
goal achievement—and the subjective expected utility
theory—considering the risks, losses, and outcomes
associated with the decision to admit to a sensitive
behavior or not (Krumpal, 2013). Researchers under-
score the distinction between response styles (consistent
across time) and response sets (short-lived responses

Social desirability bias refers to the tendency to present
oneself and one’s social context in a way that is per-
ceived to be socially acceptable, but not wholly reflec-
tive of one’s reality. In research, the bias denotes a
mismatch between participants’ genuine construction
of reality and the presentation of that reality to research-

ers. Researchers have noted a distinction between social that may be influenced by situational factors such as the

csirapuity responding 4 a personaity attribute presence of an interviewer) (D. N. Jackson & Messick,
(inflated, but honestly held, positive self-perception) 1958: Paulhus, 2001).

and social desirability responding as a response style (a
tendency to do impression management, or alter how
others perceive one’s reality) (Pauls & Stemmler,
2003), cautioning that the measurement or correction of
social desirability bias in research should focus on the
latter (Paulhus, 1984, 2001).

Early explorations of the construct of social desir-
ability bias derive from psychology, attending to matters
related to response tendencies and intentionality. Based
on the use of standardized surveys, social desirability 'University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
bias is considered to stem from the sensitive nature of an .

- qe ge ape age : : Corresponding Author:
answer, and is distinct from sensitivities associated with Nicole Bergen, University of Ottawa, 75 Laurier Ave East, Ottawa,
the intrusiveness of a question or the respondent’s per- Ontario, Canada KIN 6N5.
ceived risk of disclosure (Krumpal, 2013). The rationale Email: nicolejbergen@gmail.com

In research, social desirability tendencies tend to
emerge in characteristic ways. They are more common in
research on issues that participants find sensitive or con-
troversial, and in situations where there are widely
accepted attitudes, behaviors, or norms (Grimm, 2010).
Social desirability bias has been found to present differ-
ently depending on the affluence of the country (Johnson

 
784

Qualitative Health Research 30(5)

 

& Van de Vijver, 2002), prevailing cultural norms
(Johnson & Van de Vijver, 2002) such as the collectivist
versus individualist nature of the society (Lalwani et al.,
2006), and individual characteristics such as social posi-
tion (Johnson & Van de Vijver, 2002), gender (Kelly
et al., 2013), and personality traits (Iohnson & Van de
Vijver, 2002).

Social desirability bias is problematic because it can
lead to overestimation of the positive and diminished het-
erogeneity in responses, resulting in a questionable
appearance of consensus. Researchers have suggested
different approaches to minimize or account for the bias.
Some advocate the collection of data through self-admin-
istered questionnaires, positing that the absence of
another person removes the normative pressure to answer
in a certain manner (Grimm, 2010; Johnson & Van de
Vijver, 2002). Participant observation techniques have
been recommended to triangulate other forms of data col-
lection (Freeth et al., 2012; Harvey, 2018), while face-to-
face interviews permit trained interviewers to take
measures to probe and clarify participant responses
(Kelly et al., 2013; Mooney et al., 2018).

This article pertains to social desirability bias in a
qualitative research study, providing an empirical account
of how one research team developed and employed strat-
egies to detect and limit social desirability bias. We draw
from our own research study about maternal, neonatal
and child health (MNCH) in Ethiopia, where we con-
ducted in-depth interviews and focus group discussions
with community stakeholders to learn more about their
attitudes, perceptions, and experiences related to MNCH,
including barriers and enablers of health service use
(Bergen, 2018). In Ethiopia, a highly collectivist society,
the prevailing cultural, social, and political environments
encourage high conformity and compliance to institu-
tional norms and values (Maes, 2017; Ostebo et al.,
2018). Previous qualitative studies about health services
in Ethiopia have acknowledged the possibility of social
desirability bias as a research limitation (Girma et al.,
2011; R. Jackson et al., 2017; King et al., 2016), yet few
elaborate on steps taken to detect and limit the bias. In
this article, we describe how social desirability bias
emerged as a consideration during the data collection
stage of our study, and how researchers worked alongside
a team of data collectors to characterize social desirabil-
ity tendencies in participants, and then develop/imple-
ment approaches to minimize the bias.

Methods

Context

The Safe Motherhood Project is a collaboration between
researchers at Jimma University and the University of

Ottawa. In 2016, in the preliminary stages of this project,
we undertook a qualitative rapid assessment study to
explore community perceptions and experiences related
to the following: health (generally); MNCH service use;
MNCH traditions, practices, and beliefs; stakeholder
roles in promoting MNCH; and MNCH knowledge
acquisition and sources of information (Asfaw et al.,
2019; Bergen et al., 2018; Mamo et al., 2019). The pri-
mary purpose of the rapid assessment study was to inform
the design and delivery of the two Safe Motherhood
Project interventions (information, education and com-
munication activities, and improved infrastructure and
functionality of maternal waiting areas); the findings
from the rapid assessment study were also used to develop
survey tools for use in the project’s baseline data collec-
tion in 2017-2018.

As part of the qualitative rapid assessment study, we
conducted a series of 24 in-depth interviews and 12 focus
group discussions in rural areas of Jimma Zone, Ethiopia.
The participants included various stakeholders in MNCH.
Health extension workers (HEWs) (locally recruited,
female community health workers comprising the most
decentralized component of the formal health workforce
in Ethiopia), members of the Women’s Development
Army (a volunteer-based community group that supports
the work of HEWs), members of the Male Development
Army (a volunteer-based community group focusing on
aspects of community development related to physical
infrastructure or agriculture), and religious leaders (pre-
dominantly Muslim imams) participated in in-depth inter-
views, while focus group discussions with 6-12
participants were held with female and male community
members. The focus group discussions and in-depth inter-
views posed similar questions, with less specificity in the
focus group discussions and more detailed probes in the
in-depth interviews. The study took place at six rural or
semirural health posts (basic health facilities staffed by
2-3 HEWs), located in three districts of Jimma Zone. The
six health posts were invited to participate due to their
accessibility from Jimma, established contact between
health post personnel and members of the research team,
and willingness of at least one HEW to participate. The
HEWs at each of the six health posts, under guidance from
the Safe Motherhood Project coordinator, recruited other
participants for the in-depth interviews and focus group
discussions. Participants received a small financial com-
pensation to help cover transportation costs.

The Safe Motherhood Project researchers worked
closely with a team of data collectors from Jimma
University, who assisted with fieldwork tasks (namely,
conducting the in-depth interviews and focus group dis-
cussions) and post-fieldwork tasks (namely, preparing
written transcripts of the in-depth interviews and focus
group discussions in English). Other activities, including
Bergen and Labonté

785

 

keeping field notes, participating in a series of debriefing
and reflection sessions, and participating in research team
meetings, were completed concurrently (see the “Data
Sources” section for more details).

Ethical clearance for this research was obtained from
Jimma University College of Health Sciences Institutional
Review Board and University of Ottawa Health Sciences
and Science Research Ethics Board; the research was
conducted in accordance with the prevailing ethical
principles.

Working With Data Collectors

The study employed nine data collectors (7 male and 2
female) who were graduate students and/or staff at Jimma
University, and fluent in English and Afan Oromo (the
local language). They each had previous experience or
exposure to qualitative research. The data collectors par-
ticipated in a two-day induction workshop facilitated by
three of the Safe Motherhood Project researchers and the
project coordinator. The induction workshop introduced
the overall aims of the Safe Motherhood Project and the
rapid qualitative assessment study; researchers facilitated
sessions about ethical considerations, confidentiality, and
field notes. The group worked through an extensive
review of the research instruments, including discussions
about translation into Afan Oromo, and minor modifica-
tions to the in-depth interview and focus group discussion
guidelines.

Fieldwork took place over 6 days, with one research
site visit per day. Seven or eight data collectors (including
at least one female) were in attendance each day, and at
least two Safe Motherhood Project researchers from
Jimma University and/or the University of Ottawa were
present in a supervisory capacity. Focus group discus-
sions were facilitated by teams of two data collectors, and
there was one data collector per in-depth interview. Data
collectors obtained written or oral informed consent for
participation from each participant at the beginning of the
in-depth interview or focus group discussion. In most
cases, oral consent was obtained due to low literacy lev-
els and cultural considerations about the acceptability of
signing consent forms.

Data Sources

We captured data collectors’ and project researchers’
reflections and experiences about social desirability bias
through three main sources: field notes, an internal field
report, and relevant email exchanges between the Safe
Motherhood Project researchers.

e Project researchers and data collectors partici-
pated in daily debriefing sessions after each day

of fieldwork to discuss key findings, challenges,
and other issues and to share strategies to enhance
data collection. These sessions took place directly
after the data collection activities to capture the
group’s impressions. Typically, they were held in
a private area at the field site, during transporta-
tion home from the field site, or in a private area
of a coffee shop. The sessions became more
detailed and longer in duration as the study pro-
gressed. To document their experiences and
impressions, and to capture the issues raised dur-
ing the debriefing sessions, data collectors and
researchers kept extensive field notes, which were
submitted to the research team. The protocol for
field notes was discussed in the pre-fieldwork
training session, based on a field note guide devel-
oped by the research team.

e Midway through the fieldwork, a larger meeting
facilitated by a senior researcher on the Safe
Motherhood Project and attended by project
researchers, the project coordinator, and data col-
lectors, provided an opportunity to elaborate on
issues identified in the daily debriefing sessions
and brainstorm possible solutions. This meeting
was held on the university campus and lasted for
about 2 hr. The minutes and notes from this meet-
ing were summarized in the internal field report.

e Inthe 2 weeks following the completion of field-
work, project researchers held individual reflec-
tion sessions with each data collector to inquire
about the data collection activities, and their
impressions of the findings; the salient aspects of
these discussions were summarized as field notes
and served as a major input for the internal field
report. These sessions took place on the university
campus and lasted about half an hour each. They
were administered by two members of the research
team, and though not mandatory for the data col-
lectors, all data collectors agreed to participate.

Throughout all stages of the study, the project researchers
in Ethiopia and Canada communicated through email
about the progress of the research, highlighting salient
observations and reflections. Some aspects of these
exchanges were similar to the project researchers’ field
notes, though the questions and prompts from off-site
project researchers generated new avenues of thought.

Data Analysis

Data analysis drew from the content of field notes, the
internal field report, and relevant email exchanges
between Safe Motherhood Project researchers. In total,
51 documents were imported into Atlas.ti software for
786

Qualitative Health Research 30(5)

 

analysis. We coded the material by two major themes:
how social desirability bias may have presented in the
research, and strategies adopted by the research team
to navigate these influences. Then, we summarized
emergent ideas within each theme. These ideas tended
to be present across multiple sources of data. For
example, issues raised in field notes were often dis-
cussed through email exchanges and highlighted in the
internal field report. We consulted the 36 in-depth
interview and focus group discussion transcripts gen-
erated for the study to cross-reference examples men-
tioned in the documents (when provided), or to identify
examples that illustrated ideas raised in the documents
(when examples were not provided). When possible,
we used the date from the field note to obtain a tran-
script from the same day to find an example that illus-
trated the issue identified by the data collector or
researcher.

Results

Detecting Social Desirability Tendencies

All data collectors employed in the study believed that
some participant responses reflected social desirability
tendencies. As university students or staff with prior
experience in community-based public health research,
the data collectors relied on their preexisting exposure to
the research context as well as their interactions with the
participants to identify common cues suggesting social
desirability tendencies in in-depth interview and focus
group discussion participant answers. These included:
denial of (already known) problems, challenges, or short-
comings; providing only partial or vague answers (palter-
ing); excessive and repeated praise for government
initiatives; nervous facial expression and other body lan-
guage cues; and inconsistent use of advanced vocabulary
related to the study topic. The data collectors provided
examples of instances when participants exhibited these
behaviors in the study interviews (Table 1).

Data collectors did not think that all participants
demonstrated social desirability tendencies, and they
also did not think that all responses were biased. Data
collectors discussed how they distinguished between
participants’ authentic beliefs (e.g., that there were no
problems, or that the government deserved excessive
praise) versus participants’ presentation of their reality
in ways that suggested a social desirability bias (e.g.,
immediate praise or denial of problems without time for
reflection). Some data collectors noticed a pattern
whereby participants displayed more social desirability
tendencies at the onset of the in-depth interview or focus
group discussion and the behavior diminished as the
encounter progressed. They noted that there were

sometimes inconsistencies in a participant’s responses
within a single in-depth interview or focus group dis-
cussion. For example, while some participants expressed
that home births never happen, when they were later
asked to state where they had given birth to their own
children, the majority indicated that the births had taken
place at home. This contradiction flagged the possibility
of incongruence between their expressed beliefs and
practices regarding place of birth.

Some data collectors noted that participants in one-on-
one interviews were more likely to respond in a socially
desirable manner if another individual was within ear-
shot, especially if the individual was an HEW or an influ-
ential community member. In focus group discussions, if
one of the participants held a position of power within the
community (e.g., a community leader or relative of a
community leader), the other participants would some-
times let them speak first, and then agree with their
opinions.

Strategies to Minimize Social Desirability Bias

Throughout the data collection activities, the data collec-
tors developed strategies to avoid or mitigate social
desirability tendencies. When setting up the in-depth
interviews or focus group discussions, data collectors
tried to ensure that the location was private and not
within earshot of others. At the beginning of each in-
depth interview or focus group discussion, the data col-
lectors confirmed that the participants met the criteria to
participate in the study. For example, development army
leaders and HEWs, though part of the community, were
not permitted to participate in focus group discussions
for community members.

While conducting the in-depth interviews or focus
group discussions, data collectors used various
approaches to establish rapport with participants,
including the use of humor, self-disclosure, and/or
making displays of respect. Given that data collectors
were outsiders to the community, these strategies
helped to put participants at ease and make them feel
comfortable. Data collectors came to appreciate the
importance of clearly explaining details about the study
to participants, including the purpose of the overall
study, how the data would be used, and confidentiality
and anonymity procedures. Data collectors felt that
with a better understanding of the purpose of the
research (i.e., to learn about MNCH perspectives and
experiences, positive and negative, and support inter-
ventions to promote MNCH) the participants were less
likely to view the encounter as an audit or evaluation of
their performance.

As they became more familiar with the in-depth inter-
view and focus group discussion guides and more
Bergen and Labonté

787

 

Table |. Cues for Detecting Social Desirability Tendencies.

 

Behavior

Example

 

Denial of any
problem,
challenge, or
shortcomings

Providing partial
or vague answers
(paltering)

Excessive and
repeated praise
for government
initiatives

Nervous facial
expression and
body language

Inconsistent use of
vocabulary

A major government initiative in Ethiopia is for all women to give birth at a health facility. When asked
about usual place of delivery, women in a focus group discussion insisted that there was complete
adherence to the facility birth initiative, with comments like: “No women ever give birth at home. We
are perfect in this kebele.”

Religious leaders are prominent opinion leaders in many communities and are sometimes called upon
to reinforce health messages. When probed about his role in promoting health, one religious leader
responded: “We have a role. It is important.”

The Ethiopian Ministry of Health has introduced a series of major primary health care reforms since
2004. When asked about maternal health challenges in their community, participants in a focus group
discussion answered as follows: “The government has helped us all. After the government plan the health
extension workers were with us, and mothers did not encounter problems. Thanks to our government.”

Data collectors asked participants about what actions would be needed to be taken by various
stakeholders to further improve health in their communities. Focus group discussion participants looked
to others for affirmation of their opinions or appeared nervous, especially if prompted to comment on
the roles of stakeholders with political connections.

Data collectors noted that some participants used advanced vocabulary (in the local language) when
discussing certain topics, which was inconsistent with their education level and other use of language.
One participant used advanced terms to refer to phases of antenatal care in a manner that the data
collector suspected resulted from a preinterview briefing by the health extension worker (HEW) (i.e.,
where the participant was advised how to respond to certain questions).

 

experienced in the field, data collectors developed ways
of asking questions to minimize social desirability biases
(Table 2). These techniques attempted to minimize par-
ticipants’ social desirability bias and to promote more
candid and detailed responses. Data collectors noted that
if they suspected a response to reflect social desirability
tendencies, they would remain nonconfrontational and

respectful, and try one of these techniques to try to elicit
amore authentic response. In a few cases where data col-
lectors suspected that the participant had been primed
about what to say (e.g., in a preinterview briefing by the
HEW), they listened as the participant expressed these
ideas, and then proceeded to ask questions about the par-
ticipants’ own experiences and perspectives.

Table 2. Techniques for Asking Questions in a Manner That Limits Social Desirability Responses, With Examples.

 

 

Technique Original Approach Improved Approach
Indirect Posing questions directly Posing indirect questions about the past, or the behaviors of others
questioning Example: What harmful traditional Example: What harmful practices do you know about that existed
practices are done in your in the past? Do you think these practices might exist today in a
community? hidden or open manner?
Providing Asking questions and waiting for Responding to hesitant participants by assuring them that their
assurances participants to respond opinions are not wrong, and asking them to please speak freely

Probing for more

Briefly explaining the confidentiality
and anonymity procedures at the
beginning of the in-depth interview
or focus group discussion

Accepting generic or incomplete

information responses

Requesting Accepting generic or incomplete
stories or responses
examples

Prefacing the Posing questions directly and with
question little context

Example: Why do women attend
(or not attend) antenatal care
visits?

Thoroughly explaining the confidentiality and anonymity
procedures at the beginning of the in-depth interview or focus
group discussion, and then offering reminders throughout the
encounter, especially preceding sensitive questions

Asking follow-up questions, or prompts

Example: Can you explain more about why you feel this way?

Requesting that participants provide a story or example to
illustrate their response

Example: Can you tell me about a time that you experienced this?

Providing context when asking questions, acknowledging that
all communities have challenges and that people have diverse
experiences

Example: We know that some women attend antenatal care visits
and others do not. What do you think are the reasons why
women do (and do not) attend?

 
788

Qualitative Health Research 30(5)

 

Discussion

To date, little research attention has been given to devel-
oping practical strategies for how to identify and mini-
mize social desirability during qualitative fieldwork. This
article proposes approaches for researchers to work
together with data collectors to identify context-specific
forms of social desirability bias in health research and to
develop protocols to strengthen data collection practices
in ways that expose social desirability tendencies and
facilitate open communication within the research team.
Although our findings are not an attempt to measure
social desirability bias per se, they do provide an account
of how the implications of social desirability bias in qual-
itative research can be better understood and addressed.
Our findings add to a small body of literature that
explores social desirability in community-based qualita-
tive health research in Ethiopia. Social environments
within Ethiopia, a highly collectivist society, tend to
reinforce conformity and compliance to established
norms and values. Certain strategies that we identified
for limiting social desirability bias (i.e., detailing the
purpose of the study and providing assurances) have
been applied by other Ethiopian-based research groups.
King et al. (2016), in their qualitative study with HEWs
about maternal health service use, counteracted sus-
pected social desirability bias by communicating the
benefits of the research and assuring participants of the
confidentiality measures (King et al., 2016). R. Jackson
et al. (2017), in effort to limit social desirability bias,
clarified that the purpose of their study was not to evalu-
ate job performance of the HEWs that they interviewed
but to better understand delays in access to care (an
important distinction, which was also noted in our find-
ings). In both articles, detailed commentary about the
deployment and/or success of these strategies was,
understandably, outside the scope of reporting.

Personality Attribute or Response Style?

When data collectors suspected that participants were
exhibiting social desirability tendencies, they primarily
relied on their intuition, knowledge, and previous expo-
sure to distinguish impression management response
styles from personality attributes associated with exag-
gerated self-regard. The data collectors attest to this judg-
ment sharpening as they became more immersed in the
research and were generally very confident in their ability
to detect instances of social desirability bias; however,
beyond describing the cues for detecting social desirabil-
ity bias and patterns in their occurrence, they could offer
little explanation about how they made the distinction.
Psychology research has demonstrated that certain condi-
tions and preparations can enhance an individual’s ability

to understand and make judgments about the behaviors
and interactions of others (Shaw et al., 2013; ten Brinke
et al., 2016). These findings lend support to the notion
that the data collectors can become more effective at
detecting social desirability bias as a result of group dis-
cussions and debriefings. Researchers engaged in in-
depth interviews or focus group discussions may benefit
from training programs that integrate a focus on detecting
social desirability bias.

Data collectors in our study relied on behavioral cues
to detect social desirability, including both verbal and
nonverbal cues. Previous research supports the idea that
individuals may be more effective in detecting bias
when considering both types of cues (Vrij et al., 2000).
We note, however, that while nervousness may be a cue
of social desirability bias, it is also a common occur-
rence in many social interactions, especially if the indi-
viduals are not familiar with one another, or if they are
not used to sharing opinions in a group setting. The data
collectors in our study suggested that they sometimes
based their suspicion of social desirability bias on con-
tradictions and inconsistencies in participants’
responses. We interpret this finding with caution, given
that participants in research studies may change their
answers, may misinterpret questions, and/or may genu-
inely have conflicting or complex views. Data collectors
may, however, become familiar with the sensitivity of
particular questions over time, and thus be able to better
ascertain patterns of social desirability bias (replicating
aspects of social desirability measurement tools applied
in psychology; Furnham, 1986).

Questioning Techniques, Rapport Building, and
Power Differentials

The wording and delivery of questions by data collectors
during in-depth interviews and focus group discussions
might steer participants toward biased or unbiased
responses. Fisher (1993), who examined the indirect
questioning technique on social desirability bias in mar-
keting, found a difference between the mean scores of
socially sensitive questions when asked directly versus
indirectly; the difference was not apparent for socially
neutral questions. Fisher (1993) further distinguishes
between questions that address personal outcomes (based
on internalized values that are independent of social con-
siderations) versus normative constructs (motivate by the
expectations and approval/disapproval by others),
hypothesizing that the former line of questioning is less
subject to social desirability bias than the latter. Thus,
participants may be less likely to engage in impression
management when their responses do not require them to
make social judgments. Techniques such as indirect
Bergen and Labonté

789

 

questioning and prefacing the question (whereby the data
collector asserts the social judgment) may be useful
options to reorient the nature of the question and thereby
reduce social desirability bias, encouraging participants
to speak freely, without judgment. Highly collectivist
societies tend to make sharper in-group and out-group
distinctions and are less forthcoming to those perceived
to be part of the out-group (Johnson & Van de Vijver,
2002). Thus, researchers engaged with participants in
these settings may require deliberate efforts to minimize
the extent to which they are viewed as the out-group,
especially in interactions with individuals who hold less
influential social positions.

Rapport building techniques such as humor, self-dis-
closure, and researcher—participant matching by sociode-
mographic characteristics have been applied in other
settings. Vallano and Compo (2011), studying the accu-
racy of eye-witness accounts, found that verbal rapport
building through interviewer self-disclosure and express-
ing interest in the respondent improved recall accuracy of
past events and acted as a buffer against inaccurate
reporting. Humor is another strategy that can help to alle-
viate power differentials and facilitate rapport building in
group-based research (Hewer et al., 2019). Matching by
sociodemographic characteristics (e.g., gender, ethnicity,
and age) is a common strategy to enhance relations and
foster a mutual sense of understanding and empathy. In
settings with prevailing ethnic tensions or strong gender
norms, matching by these characteristics can be particu-
larly important (Chiumento et al., 2018). In our study,
data collectors used approaches that fit with their person-
ality to establish rapport, which may have relied on a
shared characteristic with the participant (especially lan-
guage and cultural ties) but sometimes relied on a differ-
ing characteristic (such as younger data collectors making
gestures of respect to elderly participants). Interestingly,
in the context of our research, gender matching between
data collectors and participants was not a factor that data
collectors considered to be important with regard to social
desirability bias.

The benefits of rapport building, however, have lim-
its. In a study in Vietnam, Latkin et al. (2016) found that
the interviewer strategy of establishing rapport with the
participant did not always have the intended effect:
While participants underscored the importance of feel-
ing comfortable and trusting the interviewer, this famil-
larity also led to decreased reports of risk behavior. The
study, which asked a subsample of participants from a
previous survey to reflect on the experiences of them-
selves and other participants, discovered that partici-
pants sometimes tailored their answers to ensure that
they met the criteria to be part of the study, or to alter the
duration of the survey (Latkin et al., 2016). Researchers
should be cognizant of the potential risks of rapport

building and the power imbalances implicit in the
researcher—participant relationship.

Power differentials were apparent in our study on
several levels and impacted how the research team came
to understand issues related to social desirability bias.
Initially, some of the data collectors in our study were
hesitant to openly discuss the possibility of such bias.
Given the complex role that data collectors assumed as
partial insiders and outsiders both in the community and
within the research team, the impetus to discuss the pos-
sibility of social desirability bias was low, while the
potential costs, such as reflecting upon the interviewing/
facilitation skills of the data collector or questioning the
integrity of community participants in the study, were
high. Lowering social costs may facilitate more open
conversations (ten Brinke et al., 2016). Senior research-
ers and supervisors can lower data collectors’ social
costs by demonstrating an awareness of the possibility
of social desirability bias, offering examples of when
they have previously encountered social desirability
bias, and providing necessary assurances about the inev-
itability of social desirability tendencies. Open commu-
nication between the researcher and data collectors can
strengthen the research process, facilitate nuanced
insights into the data, and enable comprehensive and
transparent reporting (Bergen, 2018).

Power differentials also exist within communities.
The data collectors in our study mentioned that many of
the HEW-recruited participants had links to political
leaders, and that the participants had been selected
because of these links. This recruitment method may
have exacerbated social desirability tendencies through
selection bias (i.e., those with certain views and experi-
ences were invited to participate), preinterview brief-
ings by the HEWs about how to respond, exposure to
political propaganda, desire to protect the community
reputation, and expectations that participants would be
financially compensated.

Preempting Social Desirability Bias

Rather than ignoring or denying the persistence of social
desirability bias, researchers should acknowledge it as a
reality and take measures to account for it throughout the
research process. If unattended to at previous stages of
the research, social desirability bias can affect the quality
of the data, leaving researchers with incomplete and shal-
low contextualization of responses, missing information
about weaknesses and barriers, and/or a preponderance of
one-sided perspectives. Taking active measures to detect
and limit biases strengthens the rigor and transparency of
qualitative research and provides opportunities for reflex-
ive contemplation. To this end, embracing tensions and
ambiguity in research, and leaving room for flexibility,
790

Qualitative Health Research 30(5)

 

creativity, and responsiveness can lead researchers to new
insights (Simovska et al., 2019).

Researchers in Ethiopia and abroad may benefit from
the lessons learned in our study. In particular, we high-
light the importance of planning regular debriefing ses-
sions as a research team. This encourages data collectors
to discuss and address challenges on an ongoing basis,
helps to keep morale high, and encourages skill develop-
ment. We also underscore that researchers’ engagement
with data collectors and the data collection process can
yield insights into possible sources of bias that may not
be apparent solely by reviewing transcripts. Although
these measures emanate from our work in Ethiopia, they
are general in nature and may be adapted for any interna-
tional setting where social desirability tendencies are
apparent (see Table 1). We welcome further studies or
comments on their applicability in other contexts. (As an
extension of our findings, Table S1 in the supplemental
file specifies measures that research teams can take to
minimize social desirability bias in the pre-fieldwork
stage of research.)

Limitations and Future Research Directions

Our findings are derived from studying field notes, obser-
vations, and communications, which provided a rich
array of perspectives from members of the research team.
We acknowledge that our findings derive from our expe-
riences working with a research team that is native to the
research setting, which may not be feasible in all research
endeavors. We did not engage with the community-based
participants in the study to explore and characterize social
desirability tendencies per se. Previous research has sug-
gested that early engagement with community leaders
provides critical insight when preparing for subsequent
interviews with community members (Jimenez et al.,
2019), which could be a useful strategy to anticipate
social desirability tendencies. Future research may seek
to incorporate the participants’ feedback about why and
when they adopt social desirability tendencies, which
would triangulate our findings.

Additional research is warranted to better understand
the underlying reasons why (and when) individuals
adopt social desirability tendencies and then, 1f appropri-
ate, identify approaches to respond to the underlying
causes that drive the behavior. The study of social desir-
ability bias in qualitative research may benefit from the
integration of learnings from cultural consensus theories
(.e., theories studying cultural beliefs and the degree to
which individuals know or report them; Weller, 2007)
and integration with approaches to quantify and account
for reporting biases. We also call for more research to
explore strategies to account for social desirability bias
during data analysis and reporting, as well as to compare

how strategies to detect and limit social desirability bias
can be translated to different settings and research topics.
We acknowledge that there may be an inherent circular
issue in the discussion of social desirability bias, as the
investigators themselves may also demonstrate desir-
ability bias on the subject.

Conclusion

While social desirability bias is often cited as a limita-
tion in qualitative research, detailed characterization of
the phenomenon is lacking, especially in highly collec-
tivist settings such as rural Ethiopia. Our findings,
which characterized social desirability bias issues in our
research about MNCH in Jimma Zone, contribute to the
broader literature in two important ways. First, acknow]-
edging that social desirability bias was an inherent part
of our research, we describe strategies that we devel-
oped to detect and limit such bias. These strategies
advance current approaches to qualitative data collec-
tion and stand to benefit other researchers undertaking
studies of a similar nature. Second, through our process
of ongoing engagement with the research team about
social desirability issues, we gained insight into how
research groups can foster a heightened consciousness
about social desirability bias. We advocate for research
teams to create opportunities to discuss social desirabil-
ity bias at various stages of the research process in a
trusting and confidential environment.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to acknowledge members of the research
team (Lakew Abebe, Muluemebet Abera, Yisalemush Asefa,
Shifera Asfaw, Kunuz Haji Bedru, Gemechu Beyene, Gebeyehu
Bulcha Duguma, Getachew Kiros, Manisha A. Kulkarni,
Jaameeta Kurji, Abebe Mamo, Sudhakar Morankar, and
Corimne Packer). A special thanks to Lakew Abebe, Shifera
Asfaw, Alzahra Hudani, Getachew Kiros, Manisha A. Kulkarni,
Abebe Mamo, and Sudhakar Morankar for reviewing and pro-
viding comments on drafts of the manuscript.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Funding

The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article:
This work was carried out with the aid of a grant from the
Innovating for Maternal and Child Health in Africa initiative—
a partnership of Global Affairs Canada (GAC), the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), and Canada’s
International Development Research Centre (IDRC).
Bergen and Labonté

79\

 

ORCID iD
Nicole Bergen (®) https://oreid.org/0000-0002-8 161-2599

Supplemental Material

Supplemental Material for this article is available online at jour-
nals.sagepub.com/home/qhr. Please enter the article’s DOI,
located at the top right hand corner of this article in the search
bar, and click on the file folder icon to view.

References

Asfaw, S., Morankar, S., Abera, M., Mamo, A., Abebe, L.,
Bergen, N., Kulkarni, M.A., & Labonté, R. (2019). Talking
health: Trusted health messengers and effective ways of
delivering health messages for rural mothers in Southwest
Ethiopia. Archives of Public Health, 77, Article 8.

Bergen, N. (2018). Narrative depictions of working with lan-
guage interpreters in cross-language qualitative research.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 17(1).
https://doi-org/10.1177/16094069 18812301

Bergen, N., Mamo, A., Asfaw, S., Abebe, L., Kurji, J., Kiros, G.,
Abera, M., Bulcha Duguma, G., Haji Bedru, K., Kulkarni,
M.A., Labonté, R. & Morankar, S. (2018). Perceptions and
experiences related to health and health inequality among
rural communities in Jimma Zone, Ethiopia: A rapid quali-
tative assessment. International Journal for Equity in
Health, 17(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12939-018-0798-9

Chiumento, A., Rahman, A., Machin, L., & Frith, L. (2018).
Mediated research encounters: Methodological consider-
ations in cross-language qualitative interviews. Qualitative
Research, 18, 604-622.

Fisher, R. J. (1993). Social desirability bias and the validity
of indirect questioning. Journal of Consumer Research,
20(2), 303-315.

Freeth, D., Sandall, J., Allan, T., Warburton, F., Berridge, E.,
Mackintosh, N., & Abbott, S. (2012). A methodologi-
cal study to compare survey-based and observation-based
evaluations of organisational and safety cultures and then
compare both approaches with markers of the quality of
care. Health Technology Assessment, 16(25). https://doi.
org/10.33 1 0/htal6250

Furnham, A. (1986). Response bias, social desirability and dis-
simulation. Personality and Individual Differences, 7(3),
385-400.

Guma, F., Jira, C., & Girma, B. (2011). Health services utilization
and associated factors in Jimma zone, south west Ethiopia.
Ethiopian Journal of Health Sciences, 21(3), 85-94.

Grimm, P. (2010). Social desirability bias. In J. Sheth & N.
Malhotra (Eds.), Wiley international encyclopedia of mar-
keting. https://doi.org/10.1002/978 14443 16568.wiem02057

Harvey, S. A. (2018). Observe before you leap: Why observa-
tion provides critical insights for formative research and
intervention design that you'll never get from focus groups,
interviews, or KAP surveys. Global Health: Science and
Practice, 6, 299-316.

Hewer, R., Smith, K., & Fergie, G. (2019). The social function-
ality of humor in group-based research. Qualitative Health
Research, 29, 431-444.

Jackson, D. N., & Messick, S. (1958). Content and style in per-
sonality assessment. Psychological Bulletin, 55(4), 243-
252. https://doi.org/10.1037/n0045996

Jackson, R., Tesfay, F. H., Gebrehiwot, T. G., & Godefay,
H. (2017). Factors that hinder or enable maternal health
strategies to reduce delays in rural and pastoralist areas in
Ethiopia. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 22(2),
148-160. https://doiorg/10.1111/tmi.12818

Jimenez, M. E., Hudson, S. V., Lima, D., & Crabtree, B. F.
(2019). Engaging a community leader to enhance prepa-
ration for in-depth Interviews with community members.
Qualitative Health Research, 29(2), 270-278.

Johnson, T. P., & Van de Vijver, F. J. (2002). Social desirabil-
ity in cross-cultural research. In J. Harness, F. J. Vijver,
& P. Mohler (Eds.), Cross-cultural survey methods
(pp. 193-202). John Wiley.

Kelly, C. A., Soler-Hampejsek, E., Mensch, B. S., & Hewett,
P. C. (2013). Social desirability bias in sexual behavior
reporting: Evidence from an interview mode experiment
in rural Malawi. International Perspectives on Sexual
and Reproductive Health, 39(1), 14-21. https://doi.
org/10.1363/3901413

King, R., Jackson, R., Dietsch, E., & Hailemariam, A. (2016).
Utilisation of maternal health services in Ethiopia: A key
informant research project. Development in Practice,
26(2), 158-169. https://doi.org/10.1080/09614524.2016
1131244

Krumpal, I. (2013). Determinants of social desirability bias in
sensitive surveys: A literature review. Quality & Quantity,
47(4), 2025-2047. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-011-
9640-9

Lalwani, A. K., Shavitt, S., & Johnson, T. (2006). What is
the relation between cultural orientation and socially
desirable responding? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 90(1), 165-178. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
3514.90.1.165

Latkin, C. A., Mai, N. V. T., Ha, T. V., Sripaipan, T., Zelaya,
C., Le Minh, N., & Go, V. F. (2016). Social desirability
response bias and other factors that may influence self-
reports of substance use and HIV risk behaviors: A quali-
tative study of drug users in Vietnam. AJDS Education
and Prevention, 28(5), 417-425. https://doi.org/10.1521/
aeap.2016.28.5.417

Maes, K. (2017). The lives of community health work-
ers: Local labor and global health in urban Ethiopia.
Routledge.

Mamo, A., Morankar, S., Asfaw, S., Bergen, N., Kulkarni,
M. A., Abebe, L., Labonté, R., Birhanu, Z., & Abera, M.
(2019). How do community health actors explain their
roles? Exploring the roles of community health actors in
promoting maternal health services in rural Ethiopia. BMC
Health Services Research, 19, Article 724.

Mooney, A. C., Campbell, C. K., Ratlhagana, M.-J., Grignon,
J. S., Mazibuko, S., Agnew, E., & Lippman, S. A. (2018).
Beyond social desirability bias: Investigating inconsisten-
cies in self-reported HIV testing and treatment behaviors
among HIV-positive adults in North West province, South
Africa. AIDS and Behavior, 22(7), 2368-2379. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10461-018-2155-9
792

Qualitative Health Research 30(5)

 

Ostebe, M. T., Cogburn, M. D., & Mandani, A. S. (2018).
The silencing of political context in health research in
Ethiopia: Why it should be a concern. Health Policy
and Planning, 33(2), 258-270. https://doi-org/10.1093/
heapol/czx150

Paulhus, D. L. (1984). Two-component models of social
desirable responding. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 46(3), 598-609.

Paulhus, D. L. (2001). Socially desirable responding: The
evolution of a construct. In H. I. Braun, D. N. Jackson, &
D. E. Wiley (Eds.), The role of constructs in psychologi-
cal and educational measurement (pp. 49-69). Lawrence
Erlbaum.

Pauls, C. A., & Stemmler, G. (2003). Substance and bias in
social desirability responding. Personality and Individual
Differences, 35(2), 263-275.

Shaw, J., Porter, S., & ten Brinke, L. (2013). Catching liars:
Training mental health and legal professionals to detect
high-stakes lies. The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry &
Psychology, 24(2), 145-159. https://doi.org/10.1080/1478
9949.2012.752025

Simovska, V., Colding Lagermann, L., Salah Abduljalil, H.,
Lerche Merck, L., & Kousholt, D. (2019). Inside out:
What we (don’t) talk about when we talk about research.
Qualitative Research, 19, 113-130.

ten Brinke, L., Vohs, K. D., & Carney, D. R. (2016). Can ordi-
nary people detect deception after all? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 20(8), 579-588. https://doi.org/10.1016/).-tics.
2016.05.012

Vallano, J. P., & Compo, N. S. (2011). A comfortable wit-
ness is a good witness: Rapport-building and suscepti-
bility to misinformation in an investigative mock-crime
interview. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25(6), 960-
970.

Vrij, A., Edward, K., Roberts, K. P., & Bull, R. (2000).
Detecting deceit via analysis of verbal and nonverbal
behavior. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 24(4), 239-
263.

Weller, S. C. (2007). Cultural consensus theory: Applications
and frequently asked questions. Field Methods, 19(4), 339-
368. https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X07303502

Author Biographies

Nicole Bergen MHSc, BSc is a PhD Candidate in Population
Health, University of Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Ronald Labonté PhD, FCAHS, HonFFPH is Distinguished
and former Canada Research Chair in Globalization and Health
Equity, and a professor in the School of Public Health and
Epidemiology, University of Ottawa, ON, Canada.
