Exploring Social
Desirability Bias

Janne Chung
Gary S. Monroe

 

ABSTRACT. This study examines social desirability
bias in the context of ethical decision-making by
accountants. It hypothesizes a negative relation
between social desirability bias and ethical evaluation.
It also predicts an interaction effect between reli-
giousness and gender on social desirability bias. An
experiment using five general business vignettes was
carried out on 121 accountants (63 males and 58
females). The results show that social desirability bias
is higher (lower) when the situation encountered is
more (less) unethical. The bias has religiousness and
gender main effects as well as an interaction effect
between these two independent variables. Women
who were more religious recorded the highest bias
scores relative to less religious women and men
regardless of their religiousness.

KEY WORDS: ethical evaluation, ethical intention,
gender, idealism, religiousness, social desirability
bias

 

Janne Chung holds a Ph.D. from Edith Cowan University,
Western Australia. She is currently an associate professor
in accounting at the Schulich School of Business, York
University, Toronto. Professor Chung’s research inter-
ests include auditing, ethics, and tax compliance. She
has published articles in Journal of Business Ethics
and Behavioral Research in Accounting.

Gary S. Monroe holds a Ph.D. from the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst. He is currently the Chair of
Accounting at the School of Business and Information
Management, Australian National University,
Canberra. Professor Monroe’s research interests include
auditing, behavioral accounting, and ethics. He has pub-
lished articles in Journal of Business Ethics and
Behavioral Research in Accounting.

Introduction

People have a need to appear more altruistic and
society-oriented than they actually are, and social
desirability (SD) is the tendency of individuals to
deny socially undesirable actions and behaviors
and to admit to socially desirable ones (Zerbe
and Paulhus, 1987). SD bias is the tendency of
individuals to underestimate (overestimate) the
likelihood they would perform an undesirable
(desirable) action. For example, individuals gen-
erally believe they are more ethical compared to
their peers (e.g., Randall and Fernandes, 1992).
Until recently, SD bias has received little atten-
tion from business ethics researchers, but lately
this bias is receiving more research attention (e.g.,
Cohen et al., 1998, 2001; Schoderbek and
Deshpande, 1996; Randall and Fernandes, 1992;
Paulhus, 1984). Cohen et al. (1998, 2001) and
Schoderbek and Deshpande (1996) report a
gender effect on this bias and Randall and
Fernandes (1992) examine the impact of social
desirability on self-reported ethical conduct.
Besides these studies, there is little literature that
explains the nature and source of this bias in a
business ethics decision setting. The examination
of this bias has three important implications for
researchers, educators, employers and society at
large. First, our interpretation and understanding
of research findings that make use of self-reported
data, especially in the ethics area, may be affected
by this bias. Second, individuals who believe they
are more ethical relative to their peers may feel
no pressure to improve their own ethical
conduct, and third, these individuals may justify
their own unethical behavior as being necessary
to compete on an even keel with their peers
(Tyson, 1990). These attitudes are untenable in

 

mA Journal of Business Ethics 44: 291-302, 2003.

hy © 2003 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
292 Janne Chung and Gary S. Monroe

the business environment as it faces serious ques-
tions about its integrity, especially in the wake of
recent high profile cases, e.g., Enron’s filing for
bankruptcy protection in November 2001 raised
questions of auditor independence and corporate
greed and mismanagement.

The purposes of this study are three-fold. First,
we examine whether the size of this bias is
dependent upon the ethicality of the specific
dilemma encountered. The discovery of such a
relationship would help ethics researchers under-
stand the impact of this bias on the validity of
their findings. This is especially important when
almost 90% of business ethics research makes use
of self-reported data (Randall and Gibson, 1990),
and evidence of this bias raises questions about
the validity of sociology and ethics research that
makes use of such data.

Second, in their book, “Megatrends”, Naisbitt
and Aburdene (1990) identify the religious revival
of the new millennium as one of ten megatrends
that will affect the relationship between busi-
nesses and their clients. Recognition of the
importance of this trend is important because it
has broad social influence on the way business
is conducted in the new millenium (Weaver
and Agle, 2002; Singhapakdi et al., 2000a).
Consequently, interest in the effect of religious-
ness on business decisions has generated a small
but growing number of research studies (e.¢.,
Singhapakdi et al., 2000a, 2000b; Latif, 2000;
Barnett et al., 1996). Given the importance of
this trend, this study examines the effect of reli-
giousness on individuals’ SD bias in an attempt
to explain its source. Identifying the source of
SD bias will help ethics researchers explain their
results more meaningfully as well as control for
it in future research. In addition, it would also
help educators and employers design more effec-
tive ethics training programs.

Third, Cohen et al. (1998, 2001) consistently
find a gender effect on SD bias among U.S. and
Canadian business professionals and students, that
is, women record higher bias scores relative to
men. Given the small number of studies that
reported this finding, replications are important
before generalizations can be made (Lindsay and
Hubbard, 2001; Bamber et al., 2000: Lindsay,
1994). Consequently, we replicate and extend

Cohen et al’s (1998, 2001) findings to a group
of Australians in an attempt to test the robustness
of their results and whether their results have
cultural effects.

Theory Development
Ethical evaluation

SD is the general tendency of individuals to
present themselves in a manner that makes them
look positive with regard to culturally accepted
standards of behavior. For example, when job
applicants were asked how important salary was
to their job decision, the respondents said it was
moderately important (JJurgensen, 1978). They
then responded that it was the most important
factor for other job seekers (Jurgensen, 1978).
This is because accepting a job offer based mainly
on salary is not considered socially acceptable.
Cohen et al. (1998, 2001) extended this area of
inquiry to the field of business ethics; they gave
their respondents ethical dilemmas and asked
them if they intended to act in a manner that was
similar to the actors in the ethical dilemmas and
how they thought their peers would act. The
responses followed a pattern that was similar to
that of Jurgensen’s (1978): the respondents said
they were less likely to act in an unethical
manner compared to their peers. Jurgensen’s
(1978) and Cohen et al’s (1998, 2001) findings
reflect a tendency of individuals to report as their
own subjective ranking a socially desirable order
of preference and to attribute to others an order
that is less culturally prescribed. The findings of
Jurgensen (1978) and Cohen et al. (1998, 2001)
suggest that individuals hold two contradictory
beliefs — one about themselves and the other
about their peer(s). The one about themselves is
more socially acceptable compared to the one
about their peers. Both beliefs are held simulta-
neously without them being aware of the con-
tradiction (Paulhus, 1984).

Due to the sensitive of ethical
decision-making, SD bias is more critical to its
own study relative to the study of other disci-
plines (Schoderbek and Deshpande, 1996). For

example, individuals tend to deny their own

nature
Exploring Social Desirability Bias 293

undesirable traits and behaviors to a greater
degree than others’ undesirable traits and
behavior (Zerbe and Paulhus, 1987; Groves,
1989). They underestimate their participation in
such behaviors as alcohol abuse, drug abuse, and
drunken driving (Groves, 1989). They also over-
estimate the likelihood that they would perform
a desirable behavior such as helping the poor and
giving to charity. Jones’s (1991) moral intensity
theory proposes that differences in ethical
decision-making are as much the result of cog-
nitive and individual differences as they are the
result of the individual ethical and moral situa-
tion that confronts the decision-maker. This is
because each ethical dilemma emits different
levels of ethicality (ethical evaluation) and deci-
sions may vary depending on the level of ethi-
cality conveyed by the dilemma (Jones, 1991).
Since SD bias is influenced by the desirability
(undesirability) of the behavior (Zerbe and
Paulhus, 1987; Groves, 1989), we propose that
under-claiming will be higher when the behavior
is more socially unacceptable or undesirable.
Conversely, under-claiming will be lower when
the behavior is less socially unacceptable or unde-
sirable, i.e., there will be a negative relation
between SD bias and ethical evaluation. The
following hypothesis tests this proposition in
an ethics decision-making context by stating
that:

H1: There is a negative relation between SD
bias and ethical evaluation.

Religiousness

Religiousness is defined as the strength of an
individual’s religious beliefs and encompasses
elements of affect and behavior (Cornwall
et al., 1986).' Hunt and Vitell (1993) state:
“Unquestionably, an individual’s personal religion
influences ethical decision-making. A_ priori,
compared with nonreligious people, one might
suspect that the highly religious people would
have more clearly defined deontological norms
and that such norms would play a stronger role
in ethical judgments” (780). Consequently, reli-
giousness is expected to have a positive effect on

ethical decision-making, i.e., a more religious
person would have a higher moral standard
relative to a less religious person. Empirical
evidence of this is provided by Rallapalli (1994)
who reports that marketers with higher reli-
giousness scores tend to have higher ethical
norms compared to those with low religiousness
scores. Consistent with this, religious individuals
are also more idealistic than non-religious indi-
viduals (Rallapalli, 1994).* Barnett et al. (1996)
explain it as follows: religiousness’ indirectly
affects ethical judgments through the ethical
ideology of relativism. That is religious individ-
uals hold strong beliefs in universal moral prin-
ciples — an idealistic world. The relation between
religious beliefs and the belief in universal stan-
dards of behavior influences individuals’ ethical
decision-making so that more religious individ-
uals are more likely to adopt this idealistic view-
point than less religious individuals are (Barnett
et al., 1996). Idealism has a positive effect
on ethical intentions and more religious indi-
viduals are more likely to have more ethical
intentions than less religious individuals are.
Compared to non-idealists, idealists are conse-
quently more likely to be affected by the desire
to create a favorable impression (Schoderbek and
Deshpande, 1996); such a need would have
similar effect on more religious individuals who
are also idealistic. As a result, SD bias would be
higher for the more religious relative to the less
religious.

Gender

Gender socialization theory suggests that women
are conditioned from an early age to reason dif-
ferently from men concerning moral issues. For
example, women tend to exhibit greater caring
than do men and are more likely to be aware of
and sensitive to ethical issues (Loe and Weeks,
2000; Bass et al., 1998). Because they tend to rely
more heavily than men do on deontological
norms (Loe and Weeks, 2000), women are more
likely to be concerned for the welfare of others
(Bass et al., 1998; Barnett et al., 1994, 1996).
As women are more prone to the influence of
societal norms and values, they are also more
294 Janne Chung and Gary S. Monroe

likely than men to let their workplace decisions
be affected by their emotions, and this influence
also makes them more conscious of the need to
create a favorable impression (Schoderbek and
Deshpande, 1996). This may explain women’s
higher SD bias as reported by Cohen et al. (1998,
2001).

Interaction between gender and religiousness

Based on the above discussion, women and the
more religious are expected to have higher SD
bias relative to men and the less religious respec-
tively. Consequently, more religious females are
expected to have higher SD bias scores compared
to the other three groups and an interaction
effect between gender and religiousness on SD
bias is predicted.

H2: There is a significant interaction effect
between gender and religiousness on par-
ticipants’ SD bias scores.

Method
Vignettes

Five of the eight vignettes used by Cohen et al.
(1998, 2001) were used in this study. These
vignettes comprised general business ethics situ-
ations that are frequently encountered by business
people. The order of the vignettes was random-
ized for each participant.* The five vignettes are
shown in Appendix A.

Experimental design

The experimental materials commenced with a
general description of the purpose of the exper-
iment (which was to study decision-making by
accountants) and provided an assurance of con-
fidentiality. The participants were then presented
with the five vignettes. At the end of each
vignette, they performed three experimental
tasks. The first task measured ethical evaluation

using the following scale: “The action described
above is ethical (1) . . . unethical (7).” To capture
SD bias, the method used by Jurgensen (1978),
and Cohen et al. (1998, 2001) was used in this
study. The participants responded to two
measures of ethical intentions. The first of these
measured the participants’ own intention: “The
probability that I would undertake the same
action is high (1) . . . low (7).” The second
measure captured the participants’ perception of
their peers’ intention: “The probability that my
peers would undertake the same action is high
(1)... low (7).” The difference between the two
intention measures is referred to as the SD bias
score: the larger the positive SD bias score, there-
fore, represents the higher SD bias. After
recording their ethical evaluation and intentions
for the fifth vignette, the participants provided
some demographic data. Religiousness was
measured using two items.” The first was “How
would you rate yourself'in terms of religion? Not
at all religious (1) . . . Very religious (7),” and
the second was “How often do you perform
religious activities? Never (1)... All the time
(7).” The Cronbach alpha is 0.911. Because of
the high level of internal consistency, these
items were totaled to obtain a single religious-
ness score.

Participants

The participants were 123 (male = 65, female =
58) accountants attending a national accounting
training program. There were two incomplete
responses, and this resulted in 121 (63 males and
58 females) useable responses. Their average (sd)
age was 24.30 (3.59) years. Their average (sd)
general and domain working experience were
4.39 (3.48) years and 2.65 (1.65) years respec-
tively. They were paid $20 for completing the
instrument and their demographic data are shown
in Table I.
Exploring Social Desirability Bias 295

TABLE I
Descriptive data

 

Male accountants Female accountants

 

 

Average (sd) age (years) 24.45 24.29
(3.43) (4.47)
Average (sd) general work experience (years) 4.40 4.88
(3.74) (4.00)
Average (sd) domain work experience (years) 2.89 2.37
(2.17) (1.23)
Average religiousness scores (sd) 5.98 6.88
(3.11) (3.45)
First language: (n)
— English 59 47
— Asian 1 7
— European 4
Results TABLE II

Analysis of H1 — ethical evaluation and SD bias

H1 hypothesizes a negative relation between
ethical evaluation and SD bias. To test this, we
first pooled the data from the five vignettes and
ran a correlation analysis between ethical evalu-
ation and the SD bias scores. As the ethical
evaluation measure was anchored by ethical eval-
uation (1) and unethical evaluation (7), to test
the negative relation between ethical evaluation
and SD bias, a positive correlation coefficient is
expected. The correlation coefficient (7) was
0.291 (significant at the p < 0.001 level).
Sensitivity test in the form of multiple regres-
sion analysis was also carried out with gender,
age and general and domain working experience
as control variables. The correlation between
ethical evaluation and SD bias remained signifi-
cant at the p < 0.001 level (f = 7.67). Table II
shows the average ethical evaluation and SD
bias for the individual vignettes. The appliance
vignette was evaluated the most unethical and
received the highest SD bias score whereas the
bribe vignette was evaluated the least unethical

Ethical evaluation and social desirability bias

 

 

Vignettes Ethical Social
evaluation desirability
bias score*
Mean Mean
(sd) (sd)
Appliance 5.79 0.80
(1.34) (1.04)
Loan 5.17 0.75
(1.62) (1.33)
Bad debts 5.05 0.65
(1.50) (1.13)
Bonus 4.15 0.64
(1.72) (1.34)
Bribe 4.03 0.33
(1.84) (1.32)

 

* Social desirability bias score is calculated by
taking the difference between the respondent’s own
intentions and his/her perception of his/her peers’
intentions.
296 Janne Chung and Gary S. Monroe

and received the lowest SD bias score. These
results lend further support to H1.

Analysis of H2

H2 predicts an interaction effect between reli-
giousness and gender on SD bias. To test this, we
pooled the data from the five vignettes and ran
an ANOVA with gender and religiousness as the
independent variables and the SD bias score as
the dependent variable.° Because we are inter-
ested in interaction effects, religiousness was
dichotomized at the mean to obtain two groups
— more religious and less religious.’ The ANOVA
results are shown in Table III. There was a
significant main effect for religiousness (F = 8.82,
p = 0.003). Less religious participants had an
overall SD bias mean (standard deviation) of 0.51
(1.07) and more religious participants had an
overall SD bias mean (standard deviation) of 0.81
(1.14). Table III also shows a significant main
effect for gender (F = 12.46, p = 0.000). Females
recorded higher SD bias scores (mean = 0.80,
standard deviation = 1.39) than males did (mean
= 0.48, standard deviation = 1.18).

As predicted, there was a significant interac-
tion effect between gender and religiousness (F
= 5.15, p = 0.024) (Table III). The interaction
effects for the individual vignettes are shown in
Figure 1 and the means (standard deviations) are
shown in Table IV. For all vignettes (apart from
the appliance vignette), more religious females
recorded the highest SD bias score compared to
their counterparts. These results support H2.

An interesting observation of these results is
that no significant interaction effect between reli-
giousness and gender was observed for the appli-
ance vignette (that is, the most unethical
vignette) (Table IV and panel A, Figure 1). The
more religious males had the highest SD bias
scores relative to the other three groups.
Compared to the other vignettes, the range of
the scores for this vignette is rather narrow (.73
to 0.88). It appears that when the action is very
unethical, respondents, regardless of their level of
religiousness and their gender, understate their
intentions relative to their perception of their
peers’ intentions to a similar degree. For the loan
and bribe vignettes, there was little or no differ-
ence between the scores of more religious and
less religious males, and for the bonus vignette,
less religious males actually recorded higher bias
scores than more religious males. It appears that
the female participants are driving the main reli-
giousness effect shown in Table III. For four
vignettes (loan, bad debts, bonus, and bribe),
women with higher religious scores recorded the
highest SD bias scores relative to the other three
groups.

Conclusion

This study examines the effects of ethical evalu-
ation, religiousness, and gender on SD bias. SD
bias is the difference between an individual’s own
intention and his/her perception of his/her peers’
intention. We find that SD bias is higher when
an action is judged to be more unethical: an indi-

TABLE III
ANOVA results with social desirability bias as dependent variable

 

 

Source of variation SS df F p
Main effects:

Religiousness* 13.20 1 8.82 0.003

Gender 18.66 1 12.46 0.000
‘Two-way interaction effects:

Gender X Religiousness 7.71 1 5.15 0.024

 

* The religiousness score was dichotomized at the mean to obtain two groups — less religious and more

religious.
Exploring Social Desirability Bias 297

Panel A— Appliance

—?*— Less religious —®— More religious

 

Males Females

Panel B- Loan

—¢@— Less religious —®— More religious

 

Males Females

Panel C — Bad debts

1.4
12

4
0.8
0.6
04
0.2

0

—?— Less religious

“— More religious

 

Males Females

Panel D— Bonus

—¢#— Less religious
—S— More religious

 

Males Females

Panel E — Bribe

0.8

0.6

—?— Less religious.

an -s— More religious

0.2

 

0

Males Females

Figure 1. The relationship between gender and religiousness on SD response bias.
298 Janne Chung and Gary S. Monroe

 

 

 

TABLE IV
Means (standard deviations) of the interaction effect between religiousness and gender on social desirability bias
scores
Vignettes Religiousness Gender
Male accountants Female accountants
Appliance Less religious 0.73 0.82
(1.02) (0.92)
(n = 37) (n = 33)
More religious 0.88 0.80
(1.07) (1.22)
(n = 26) (n = 25)
Loan Less religious 0.46 0.82
(1.24) (1.10)
More religious 0.46 1.36
(1.27) (1.63)
Bad debts Less religious 0.35 0.52
(0.89) (0.83)
More religious 0.65 1.28
(1.09) (1.57)
Bonus Less religious 0.49 0.42
(1.07) (1.00)
More religious 0.38 1.44
(1.33) (1.80)
Bribe Less religious 0.22 0.30
(1.42) (0.98)
More religious 0.23 0.64
(1.37) (1.52)

 

vidual understates his/her own intention more
when presented with more unethical actions
(compared to less unethical actions). SD bias is
lower when an action is perceived to be less
unethical. There is a positive relation between
religiousness and SD bias: individuals with high
religiousness scores recorded higher bias scores
compared to individuals with low religiousness
scores. Additionally, women recorded higher SD
bias scores relative to men and more religious
women’s SD bias scores were higher relative to
their counterparts.

The first purpose of this study is to examine

whether the size of SD bias is dependent upon
the ethicality of the dilemma encountered and
the results suggest this to be the case. If supported
by future research, this result could be helpful
to ethics researchers in determining the nature
of the effect of SD on the validity of their
self-reported data. It suggests that when ethical
dilemmas are used, the researcher should obtain
a measure of the ethicality of these dilemmas
used, such as through pre-testing. Once this is
known, the researcher could take steps to reduce
the impact of SD bias on his/her data. These
steps could involve providing an assurance of
Exploring Social Desirability Bias 299

confidentiality in the research materials, and
requesting that respondents not identify them-
selves on the research materials. Researchers
should probably not include any identifying
marks on the research materials and communi-
cate the absence of such marks to the respon-
dents. Additionally, the result suggests that some
measure of SD bias should be used. This could
take the form used by Jurgensen (1978), Cohen
et al. (1998, 2001), and the present study. The
Crowne-Marlow (1960) scale could also be used
to determine the extent of the effect of SD bias
on the variables of interest.

The second purpose of this study examines
religiousness and SD bias and finds that reli-
giousness covaries with individuals’ tendency to
understate their intentions to perform socially
undesirable acts. Individuals who are more reli-
gious tend to understate their intentions more
than less religious individuals do. If supported
by future research, this result suggests to ethics
researchers concerned with the effect of SD bias
on their research data that there may be a need
to control for religiousness effects. This, however,
is not a straightforward process as religion
researchers do not agree on what comprises reli-
giousness, and the literature makes use of several
religiousness scales. The ethics researcher would
have to exercise his/her judgment in determining
what scale or combination of scales to use in
his/her particular situation.

The third purpose of this study examines the
relation between gender and SD bias. Cohen et
al. (1998, 2001) find a higher female (relative to
males) SD bias in both Canadian and U.S. par-
ticipants. This study reports a higher female bias
among Australian accountants. The results of
these three studies suggest that this observation
is robust and may transcend cultural boundaries.
Additional analysis revealed no significant inter-
action effect between gender and religiousness
on ethical evaluation. This indicates that more
religious females do not make more ethical
evaluations relative to the other three groups.
These results have implications for educators
and employers as individuals with higher SD
bias scores may be less responsive to ethics
training than those with low scores and may
view ethically questionable behavior to be

widely practiced by their peers and their partic-
ipation in such activities is justified. Awareness
of this may help educators and employers
design more effective ethics training programs
aimed at encouraging more internal reflection
and ethical sensitivity among students and
employees.

The generalizability of the results of this study
is affected by two limitations. The first is the
items we used to measure religiousness. The
results reported in this study could be a function
of the specific measures used in this study.
Further research using other measures of reli-
giousness would have to be carried out before
generalizing from the results of this study.
Second, the generalizability of the results of this
study may also be affected by other variables
such as religious affiliation, political persuasion,
age, tenure and type of work experience, and
language group.® It is unclear what effect, if any,
these variables will have on the results of this
study, but they represent interesting future exten-
sions to the present study. All participants in the
study had completed an undergraduate degree,
consequently we were unable to test for educa-
tion levels effect. Future research could examine
SD bias using participants with a wider range of
education levels.

Schoderbek and Deshpande (1996) classify SD
bias into two dimensions: impression manage-
ment and self-deception. Impression management
is a result of a conscious effort of lying and faking
to create a favorable impression. Self-deception,
however, is an unconscious tendency to see
oneself more favorably compared to one’s peers.
Due to the nature of this study, we are unable
to isolate the individual effect of these two
dimensions. However, they present interesting
extensions to the present study that could be
investigated by future research.

Acknowledgement

Funding for this study was provided by the
School of Accounting, Edith Cowan University.
300 Janne Chung and Gary S. Monroe

Appendix A. Ethical vignettes

Appliance

A salesperson has just been promoted to product
manager. The salesperson’s first responsibility is
for a new, highly successful small kitchen appli-
ance. This person will be paid in part based on
sales of this product. On reviewing information
about the new product, the salesperson discovers
that there has been insufficient product testing to
meet new Commonwealth product safety guide-
lines. However, all testing so far indicated no
likelihood of any safety problem.

Action: The salesperson authorises the sales
force to continue to promote and sell the
product.

Loan

A promising new company applies for a loan at
a bank. The Credit Manager at the bank is a
friend of and frequently goes golfing with the
company’s owner. Because of this new company’s
short credit history, it does not meet the bank’s
normal lending criteria.

Action: The Credit Manager recommends
extending the loan.

Bad debts

The CEO of a company requests that the finan-
cial controller reduce the estimate for bad debts
in order to increase reported income, arguing
that this is a common practice in the industry
when times are hard. Historically, the company
has made very conservative allowances for
doubtful accounts, even in bad years. The CEO’s
request would make it one of the least conserv-
ative in the industry.

Action: The financial controller makes the
adjustment.

Bonus

A sales manager realizes that the projected quar-
terly sales figures will not be met, and thus the
manager will not receive a bonus. However, there
is a customer order which if shipped before the
customer needs it, will ensure that the manager
receives the quarterly bonus but will have no
effect on the annual sales figures.

Action: The sales manager ships the order this
quarter to ensure that the quarterly sales bonus
is earned.

Bribe

An Australian manager of a company eager to do
more business abroad has been requested to make
an undisclosed cash payment to a manager of a
local distributor in a foreign country. The
payment is requested as a “goodwill gesture” that
will allow the Australian company to introduce
its product in that foreign country. This practice
is considered a normal business procedure in that
country and no laws prohibit such a payment
there.

Action: The Australian manager verbally autho-
rises the payment.

Notes

' Religiousness has been operationalized in

various ways such as religious typology (Glock and
Stark, 1965), religious orthodoxy (Fullerton and
Hunsberger, 1982), and religious fundamentalism
(Kellstedt and Smidt, 1991). McDaniel and Burnett
(1990) defined it as the extent of individuals’ cogni-
tive commitment to general religious beliefs.
Religiousness is often described as having several
facets: cognition involving religious knowledge and
beliefs, affect which describes an individual’s emo-
tional feelings towards his or her religion, and
behavior that reflects the depth of these cognitive and
emotional involvement with his/her religion
(Cornwall et al., 1986). (See Weaver and Agle (2002)
and Barnett et al. (1996) for a discussion on the
different aspects of religiousness.) For the purposes
of this study, religiousness is defined the strength of
an individual’s religious beliefs and encompasses
elements of affect and behavior (Cornwall et al.,
1986). Religious affect and behavior normally go
hand in hand as a person with deep emotional com-
mitment to his/her religion is more likely to behave
according to its dictates such as praying, giving of
alms, fasting, and attending corporate worship.

° The results of Rallapalli’s (1994) study is subject to
the same caveat as ethical judgment being similarly
based on self-reported data and may be affected by
SD bias as well.

* Barnett et al. (1996) use the term “religiosity”.
Exploring Social Desirability Bias 301

‘ There were no significant order effects on the
dependent variables.

° We did not use the existing instruments to measure
religiousness because they were developed in a Judeo-
Christian context and comprised scale-items like
belief in God and church attendance. In Australia, a
multi-faith society, such questions would not be
relevant because some religions (e.g., Buddhism and
Taoism) do not believe in a unitarian God and do not
practice corporate worship. Instead religious obser-
vance is incorporated into daily life such as absten-
tion from meat on holy days. Singhapakdi et al. (2000)
used the Wilkes et al. (1986) religiousness scale in
Thailand (a predominantly Buddhist society) and
concluded that scales developed in the U.S. may not
adequately capture the religiousness of non-Judeo-
Christian believers Consequently, we refrained from
using these scales. Instead we measured religiousness
with two items that are more reflective of Australian
society.

Even though the effect of individual religions on
ethical decision-making is an interesting area of study,
it is beyond the scope of this paper. Additionally, this
study is only interested in the general influence of
religiousness on social desirability response bias.

° The assumption of homogeneity of variance was
not violated.

” Sensitivity tests were carried out by partitioning the
sample at the median and results were similar to those
shown in Table III.

* ANCOVA analyses show that SD bias does not have
general and domain work experience, language, and
age effects. This may be because the participants came
from a homogeneous group of accountants. They
overwhelmingly spoke English as a first language, their
average age was 24.3 years with a standard deviation
of 3.6 years, and they had limited work experience.

References

Bamber, L., T. E. Christensen and K. M. Gaver:
2000, ‘Do We Really ‘Know’ What We Think
We Know? A Case Study of Seminal Research and
its Subsequent Overgeneralization’, Accounting,
Organizations and Society 25(2), 103-130.

Barnett, T., K. Bass, G. Brown and FE. J. Herbert:
1998, ‘Ethical Ideology and the Ethical Judgments
of Marketing Professionals’, Journal of Business Ethics
17, 715-723.

Barnett, T., K. Bass and G. Brown: 1996, ‘Religiosity,
Ethical Ideology, and Intentions to Report a

Peer’s Wrongdoing’, Journal of Business Ethics 15,
1161-1174.

Barnett, T., K. Bass and G. Brown: 1994, ‘Ethical
Ideology and Ethical Judgment Regarding Ethical
Issues in Business’, Journal of Business Ethics 13,
469-480.

Bass, K., T. Barnett and G. Brown: 1998. ‘The Moral
Philosophy of Sales Managers and its Influence on
Ethical Decision Making’, Journal of Personal Selling
& Sales Management 18(2), 1-17.

Cohen, J. F, L. W. Pant and D. J. Sharp: 2001, “An
Examination of Differences in Ethical Decision-
Making Between Canadian Business Students and
Accounting Professionals’, Journal of Business Ethics
30(4), 319-336.

Cohen, J. F, L. W. Pant and D. J. Sharp: 1998, “The
Effect of Gender and Academic Discipline
Diversity on the Ethical Evaluations, Ethical
Intentions and Ethical Orientation of Potential
Public Accounting Recruits’, Accounting Horizons
13 (September), 250-270.

Cornwall, M., S. L. Albrecht, B. H. Cunningham
and B. L. Pitcher: 1986, “The Dimensions of
Religiosity: A Conceptual Model with an
Empirical Test’, Review of Religious Research 27(3),
226-243.

Crowne, D. and D. Marlow: 1960, ‘A New Scale of
Social Desirability’, Journal of Consulting Psychology
24, 349-354.

Fullerton, J. J. and B. Hunsberger: 1982, ‘A
Unidimensional Measure of Christian Orthodoxy’,
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 21,
317-326.

Glock, C. Y. and R. Stark: 1965, Religion and Society
in Tension (Ran NecNally, Chicago).

Groves, R. M.: 1989, Survey Errors and Survey Costs
(Wiley, New York).

Hair, J. FE Jr., R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham and W.
C. Black: 1995, Multivariate Data Analysis with
Readings, 4th edition (Prentice Hall, Englewood
Clifts, New Jersey).

Hunt, S. D. and S. Vitell: 1993, “The General Theory
of Marketing Ethics: A Retrospective and
Revision’, in N. C. Smith and J. A. Quelch
(eds.), Ethics in Marketing (Irwin Inc., Homewood,
IL).

Jones, T. M.: 1991, ‘Ethical Decision Making by
Individuals in Organizations: An Issue-Contingent
Model’, Academy of Management Review 16,
366-395.

Jurgensen, C. E.: 1978, ‘Job Preferences (What Makes
a Job Good or Bad?)’, Journal of Applied Psychology
63, 267-276.
302 Janne Chung and Gary S. Monroe

Kellstedt, L. and C. Smidt: 1991, ‘Measuring
Fundamentalism: An Analysis of Different
Operational Strategies’, Journal for the Scientific Study
of Religion 30, 259-278.

Latif, D. A.: 2000, “The Link Between Moral
Reasoning Scores, Social Desirability, and Patient
Care Performance Scores: Empirical Evidence from
the Retail Pharmacy Setting’, Journal of Business
Ethics 25, 255-267.

Lindsay R. M. and R. Hubbard: 2001, ‘From
Significant Difference to Significant Sameness:
Establishing a Methodological Tradition of Actively
Seeking Empirical Generalizations in the Design
of Studies (With an Application to the RAPM
Area in Management Accounting)’, An unpub-
lished manuscript, University of Saskatchewan.

Loe, T. W. and W. A. Weeks: 2000, ‘An Experimental
Investigation of Efforts to Improve Sales Students’
Moral Reasoning’, Journal of Personal Selling & Sales
Management 20(4), 243-251.

McDaniel, S. W. and J. J. Burnett: 1990, ‘Consumer
Religiosity and Retail Store Evaluative Criteria’,
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 18(2),
101-112.

Naisbitt, J. and P. Aburdene: 1990, Megatrends 2000:
The New Directions for the 1990s (Morrow, New
York).

Paulhus, D. L.: 1984, “Iwo-Component Models of
Socially Desirable Responding’, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 46, 598-609.

Randall, D. M. and M. FE Fernandes: 1992, ‘Social
Desirability Bias in Ethics Research’, Business Ethics
Quarterly 2(2), 183-205.

Randall, D. M. and A. M. Gibson: 1990,
“Methodology in Business Ethics Research: A
Review and Critical Assessment’, Journal of Business
Ethics 9(6), 457-472.

Rallapalli, K. C.: 1994, ‘Marketers’ norms: An empir-
ical investigation of the influence of personal and
situational factors on marketers’ deontological
norms’. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation
(University of Mississippi, Oxford, MS).

Schoderbek, P. P and S. P. Deshpande: 1996,
‘Impression Management, Overclaiming, and

Perceived Unethical Conduct: The Role of Male
and Female Managers’, Journal of Business Ethics 15,
409-414.

Singhapakdi, A., J. K. Marta, K. C. Rallapalli and C.
P. Rao: 2000a, “Toward an Understanding of
Religiousness and Marketing Ethics: An Empirical
Study’, Journal of Business Ethics 27, 305-319.

Singhapakdi, A., S. Salyachivin, B. Virakul and V.
Veerayangkur: 2000b. “Some Important Factors
Underlying Ethical Decision Making of Managers
in Thailand’, Journal of Business Ethics 27, 271-284.

Tyson, T.: 1990, ‘Believing that Everyone Else is
Less Ethical: Implications for Work Behavior and
Ethics Instruction’, Journal of Business Ethics 9,
715-721.

Weaver, G. R. and B. R. Agle: 2002. Religiosity and
Ethical Behavior in Organizations: A Symbolic
Interactionist Perspective’, Academy of Management
Review 27(1), 77-97.

Wilkes, R. E., J. J. Burnett and R. D. Howell: 1986,
“On the Meaning and Measurement of Religiosity
in Consumer Research’, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 14 (Spring), 47-56.

Zerbe, W. J. and D. L. Paulhus: 1987, ‘Socially
Desirable Responding in Organizational Behavior:
A Reconception’, Academy of Management Journal
12 (2), 250-264.

Janne Chung

Schulich School of Business,

York University,

4700 Keele St,

Toronto ON M3] 1P3,

Canada

E-mail: jchung@schulich. yorku.ca

Gary S Monroe

School of Business and Information Management,
Australian National University,

Canberra ACT 0200,

Australia

E-mail: gary.monroe@anu.edu.au
