MODEL BIAS IN SOCIAL ACTION

James G. March!
Stanford University

I

The basis for social action is specula-
tion. By speculation I mean nothing more profound than models of
social structure and behavior. Whether such models are viewed as
ideology, art, or wisdom, they consist in imaginations about the world.
Social policy builds on those imaginations. The major claim to
legitimacy by a social scientist is the claim that his procedures
systematically evaluate the quality of his models and, thus, that his
speculations are good ones. For the most part, [ think the claim is
reasonable; but we need occasionally to examine the problems of
evaluating our imaginations and the biases that confound our efforts to
produce good speculations.

A speculation is good if it is true, beautiful, and just. A
speculation is true to the extent to which it correctly predicts
observable behavior. A speculation is beautiful to the extent to which
its contemplation produces aesthetic pleasure. A speculation is just to
the extent to which a belief in it and action based on it produce better
people and better worlds.

There are important biases in the selection of models that reduce
their average truth value. Such problems sustain a major share of our
standard efforts in methodology. They are far from trivial. Consider,
for example, the persistent problems we have with various forms of
specification bias. Despite their importance, I do not intend to devote
attention to such biases. Similarly, there are biases that systematically
reduce the aesthetic value of our models. I believe that most treatises

'The essay borrows heavily from two books that have not yet been published.
The first is an introduction to analysis in social science, co-authored with Charles A.
Lave. The second is a book on the American college presidency, co-authored with
Michael D. Cohen. I cheerfully attribute a part of the blame to them. In addition,
the ideas have been the basis for extended conversations with a number of friends. I
want to acknowledge particularly the help of Lance Bennett, Patricia Nelson,
Bennett, Michael Butler, Soren Christensen, Michel Crozier, Claude Faucheux,
James R. Glenn, Jr., Gudmund Hernes, Helga Hernes, Jean Carter Lave, Harold J.
Leavitt, Henry M. Levin, Leslie Lincoln, Andre Massart, John Miller, Johan Olsen,
Richard C. Snyder, Alexander Szalai, Eugene J. Webb, and Gail Whitacre.

The Carnegie Commission on Higher Education and the Ford Foundation are
financially responsible.

413
REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH Vol. 42, No, 4

on social science methodology underestimate the significance of beauty
as an evaluative criterion for speculations. My intention here, however,
is to ignore beauty also. My concern is with justice, the extent to which
belief in our speculations (however true or beautiful) produces
attractive behavior.

We should like to be just. We should like to be able to say that our
models contribute to making better, rather than poorer, worlds. The
idea is a quaint one, and a complicated one. A major consideration of
the concept of justice is beyond the scope of both this commentary and
this writer. Wiser people have said wiser things on the subject already.
My limited purpose is to remind you of the importance of justice in the
construction of social science theory and to identify some possible
domains in which our current instincts may be biased in significant
ways.

Like truth and beauty, justice is an ideal rather than a state of
existence. We do not achieve it; we pursue it. In that pursuit we accept
responsibility for social myths by which we live. As critics of modern
social science have easily demonstrated, models are not neutral. I will
not attempt to reproduce those critiques. I believe that they often
underestimate the possibilities for introducing considerations of justice
into modern social science methodology. Though social scientists need
to be appropriately humble about the prospects for justice and their
contributions to it, they need not be shy about trying.

The point is simple. Independent of its truth value, a model has a
justice value. Different models suggest different actions, and the
attractiveness of the social and moral consequences of those actions do
not depend entirely on the degree to which the models are correct. Nor
is this problem solved in any significant way by producing a more
correct model. Since two equally correct models may have radically
different action implications and radically different moral force, we can
easily imagine a circumstance in which we would be willing to forego
some truth in order to achieve some justice.

Il

The complications of justice in models of social science can be
illustrated by some familiar speculations about individual human
behavior. These speculations are the myths by which we deal with other
people; they are the myths by which we deal with ourselves. Insofar as
our speculations impute unattractive features to people, so will we in
our ordinary life. Consider, for example, the following speculations
about interpersonal behavior:

Human beings aspire for power and direct their behavior
primarily toward gaining a favorable power balance with respect
to other people. Power is secured by offering resources, or
promises of resources (e.g., support, money, respect) in ex-
change for acquiescence.

414
MARCH MODEL BIAS

Such a model has some attractive features. It predicts some important
aspects of behavior. It is simple. But it makes a series of predictions
about human behavior that are unattractive as a basis for dealing with
other people. For example, it predicts that most favorable statements
made in an interpersonal situation are probably lies. This is particularly
true of statements reporting supportive behavioral intentions or positive
feelings with respect to other people. The probable truthfulness of an
insult is higher than the probable truthfulness of praise. Insofar as we
come to believe such a series of assertions, we almost certainly make
our daily life less pleasant and ourselves less attractive as human beings.

Consider similarly the following assertion common to a rather
large number of models of individual behavior:

Adult human behavior is understandable in its basic forms as
stemming primarily from experience of early childhood.

Such an assertion seems plausible. Yet, if believed, it has at least two
dubious side-effects. First, it leads parents and children both to believe
that parents should accept primary credit (and blame) for a child’s
beliefs, character, and general intellectual and moral performance.
School report cards become more important to the parent’s self-respect
than to the child’s; parents are valued in terms of their children’s
behavior. As a consequence, parent-child relations combine the worst
features of juvenile blackmail (children threatening to behave in such a
way that parents will lose respect) and parental repression (parents
determined to manage their children).

Second, belief in the model seems likely to create a static bias in
personal self-analysis. Individuals who believe the “formative years’
hypothesis seem quite likely to consider the problem of personal
identity to be a problem of “discovering’’ a pre-existing “‘real’’ self
rather than one of ‘‘creating’’ an “interesting” self. The notion of
discovery is biased against adult change. A person who believes his basic
character has been formed at an early age can have but modest
expectation of being able to modify his style of life as an adult. He is
inhibited by his model of personality development from the dangers
and pleasures of continuous personal change.

Consider finally the following assertions, which form a part of a
relatively large number of familiar models of individual behavior:

Things are not what they seem. Human beings are guided by a
number of unconscious motives that affect their behavior in
subtle ways.

Such assertions seem reasonable. They may indeed often be true.
What makes them unattractive from the point of view of justice is the
basic ambiguity a belief in them introduces with respect to human
action. We are led to ask: What does he really mean? Indeed, we are led
to ask: What do J really mean? By introducing substantial elements of

415
REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH Vol. 42, No. 4

affective ambiguity into interpersonal communications, we undermine
trust as a basis for dealing with people. We each become a little more
paranoid.

These elementary ideas of common social science illustrate the
basic point that some of our most easily accepted truths are dubious
guides to the ordinary encounters of everyday life. If the analysis is
correct, social science is culpable in some significant corruptions of our
culture. The illustrations are intended, however, as a prologue, not a
conclusion. They are a prologue to an examination of a basic model
bias in our analysis of social policy, It is a bias that has some significant
implications for accountability, performance measurement, social
responsiveness, and evaluation in social policy, as well as for efforts to
improve resource allocation decisions in areas such as education,
welfare, transportation, urban life, environment, and energy. As in the
case of the simple examples, we can identify a set of assumptions that
appear self-evidently correct in our models but which lead to policy
implications that can legitimately be questioned.

Il

Just as interpersonal interactions depend on models of human
behavior, policy analysis depends on a model of social policy making.
The ideas for that model are probably taken from, and are certainly
consistent with, the views found in most current social science thinking.
I refer particularly to economic theories of markets, social welfare, and
the firm; to political science theories of democratic politics; to
sociological and political theories of power; to managerial theories of
bureaucracy and administration; and to a miscellany of theories of
individual and social choice.

Consider, for example, the standard social welfare theories in
economics and political science. In these theories, we typically assume
that the individual members of a society have preferences with respect
to alternative social actions. The social welfare problem is to find a
social preference that is, in some sense, appropriate given the individual
preferences. The classic solutions lean toward rules of Pareto
optimality, and the literature is filled with complications—both
technical and philosophical—associated with Pareto optimality as a
criterion.

Or, consider the standard theories of political democracy. In these
theories we assume that each citizen has preferences defined over
possible social policies. He casts his vote for one of a set of candidates.
The candidate receiving the largest number of votes is elected and
assumes power (until the next election). In order to be elected,
candidates make various promises to voters; voters seek to obtain
promises by threatening to withhold votes. The literature abounds with
discussions of the complications—particularly those associated with
assuring that all potentially winning coalitions of voters and policies are
considered.

416
MARCH MODEL BIAS

Or, consider the standard theories of social power. In these
theories we assume that each individual has a preference function
defined over available social options. In addition, the social system, in
conjunction with attributes of the individual or the role he occupies,
assigns to each individual a certain amount of power. The social action
adopted by the society is presumed to be a weighted average of the
individual preferences, where the power of an individual is the weight
assigned to his preferences. The literature is focused to a considerable
extent on the problems of finding a set of measurements of power and
an elaboration of the model that are jointly consistent with reality.

Or, consider standard theories of public interest, or bureaucratic-
managerial behavior. In these theories we assume that a social welfare
function defining social preferences exists. We postulate a criterion
function: Provide for the common defense, maximize discounted
long-run expected profit; minimize educational disparities. The
technical and theoretical problem is that of designing a system to make
decisions that meet the criterion. The ideas form the base for much of
modern management (e.g., the development of modern accounting) and
management science (e.g., the development of statistical decision
theory).

The differences among these theories are important; but they
share a common normative view of the process of choice. In that view,
individuals or groups can be seen as having some set of objectives that
they pursue through action. The problems of policy making are seen as
first discovering a set of acceptable social objectives, second finding a
set of procedures for achieving those objectives, and third evaluating
the achievement of those prior objectives in order to modify future
actions to make them more efficacious for the objectives.

Such a view has at least two major biases that need to be
questioned in terms of their policy implications. The first is a relativist
bias, the belief that preferences need to be treated as exogenous
primitives, not susceptible to normative evaluation. Each of the models
of social policy making presumes prior preferences. The second bias is a
rationalist bias, the belief that, from a normative point of view, purpose
antedates action. Each of the models of social policy accepts choice as
appropriately consequent upon purpose.

IV

In order to examine these biases, we need to consider the
fundamental dogma of theories of choice. The concept of choice as a
focus for interpreting and guiding human behavior has rarely had an
easy time in the realm of ideas. It is beset by theological disputations
over free will, by the dilemmas of absurdism, by the doubts of
psychological behaviorism, by the claims of historical, economic, social,
and demographic determinism. Nevertheless, the idea that humans
make choices has proven robust enough to become a major matter of

AT
REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH Vol. 42, No. 4

faith in important segments of contemporary western civilization. It is a
faith that is professed by virtually all theories of social policy making.
The major tenets of this faith run something like this:

Human beings make choices. If done properly, choices are made
by evaluating alternatives in terms of goals on the basis of
information currently available. The alternative that is most
attractive in terms of the goals is chosen. The process of making
choices can be improved by using the technology of choice.
Through the paraphernalia of modern techniques, we can
improve the quality of the search for alternatives, the quality of
information, and the quality of the analysis used to evaluate
alternatives. Although actual choice may fall short of this ideal
in various ways, it is an attractive model of how choices should
be made by individuals, organizations, and social systems.

These articles of faith have been built upon, and have stimulated,
some scripture. It is the scripture of theories of decision making. The
scripture is partly a codification of received doctrine and partly a
source for that doctrine. As a result, our cultural ideas of intelligence
and our theories of choice bear some substantial resemblance. In
particular, they share three conspicuous interrelated ideas:

The first idea is the pre-existence of purpose. We find it natural to
base an interpretation of human choice behavior on a presumption of
human purpose. We have, in fact, invented one of the most elaborate
terminologies in the professional literature: “values’’, “needs”, ‘“‘wants”’,
“goods”, “tastes”, ‘‘preferences”, “utility”, “objectives”, “goals’’,
“aspirations”, “drives’’. All of these reflect a strong tendency to believe
that a useful interpretation of human behavior involves defining a set of
objectives that (a) are prior attributes of the system, and (b) make the
observed behavior in some sense intelligent vis-a-vis those objectives.

Whether we are talking about individuals or about organizations,
purpose is an obvious presumption of the discussion. An organization is
often defined in terms of its purpose. It is seen by some as the largest
collectivity directed by a purpose. Action within an organization is
justified (or criticized) in terms of the purpose. Individuals explain their
own behavior, as well as the behavior of others, in terms of a set of
value premises that are presumed to be antecedent to the behavior.
Normative theories of choice begin with an assumption of a pre-existent
preference ordering defined over the possible outcomes of a choice.

The second idea is the necessity of consistency. We have come to
recognize consistency both as an important property of human
behavior and as a prerequisite for normative models of choice.
Dissonance theory, balance theory, theories of congruency in attitudes,
statuses, and performances have all served to remind us of the
possibilities for interpreting human behavior in terms of the consistency
requirements of a limited capacity information-processing system.

At the same time, consistency is a cultural and theoretical virtue.

418
MARCH MODEL BIAS

Action should be made consistent with belief. Actions taken by
different parts of an organization should be consistent with each other.
Individual and organizational activities are seen as connected with each
other in terms of their consequences for some consistent set of
purposes. In an organization, the structural manifestation of the dictum
of consistency is the hierarchy with its obligations of coordination and
control. In the individual, the structural manifestation is a set of values
that generates a consistent preference ordering.

The third idea is the primacy of rationality. By rationality I mean
a procedure for deciding what is correct behavior by relating con-
sequences systematically to objectives. By placing primary emphasis on
rational techniques, we implicitly have rejected—or seriously impaired—
two other procedures for choice: (a) The processes of intuition, by
means of which people may do things without fully understanding why.
(b) The processes of tradition and faith, through which people do
things because that is the way they are done.

Both within the theory and within the culture we insist on the
ethic of rationality. We justify individual and organizational action in
terms of an analysis of means and ends. Impulse, intuition, faith, and
tradition are outside that system and viewed as antithetical to it. Faith
may be seen as a possible source of values. Intuition may be seen as a
possible source of ideas about alternatives. But the analysis and
justification of action lie within the context of reason.

These ideas are obviously deeply imbedded in the culture. Their
roots extend into ideas that have conditioned much of modern western
history and interpretations of that history. Their general acceptance is
probably highly correlated with the permeation of rationalism and
individualism into the style of thinking within the culture. The ideas are
even more obviously imbedded in modern theories of choice. It is
fundamental to those theories that thinking should precede action; that
action should serve a purpose; that purpose should be defined in terms
of a consistent set of pre-existent goals; and that choice should be based
on a consistent theory of the relation between action and its
consequences.

Every tool of management decision that is currently a part of
management science, operations research, or decision theory assumes
the prior existence of a set of consistent goals. Almost the entire
structure of micro-economic theory builds on the assumption that there
exists a well-defined, stable, and consistent preference ordering. Most
theories of individual or organizational choice behavior accept the idea
that goals exist and that (in some sense) an individual or organization
acts on those goals, choosing from among some alternatives on the
basis of available information. Discussions of educational policy, for
example, with the emphasis on goal setting, evaluation, and account-
ability, are directly in this tradition.

From the perspective of all of man’s history, the ideas of purpose,
consistency, and rationality are relatively new. Much of the technology
currently available to implement them is extremely new. Over the past

419
REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH Vol. 42, No. 4

few centuries, and conspicuously over the past few decades, we have
substantially improved man’s capability for acting purposively, con-
sistently, and rationally. We have substantially increased his propensity
to think of himself as doing so. It is an impressive victory, won-—where
it has been won—by a happy combination of timing, performance,
ideology, and persistence. It is a battle yet to be concluded, or even
engaged, in many cultures of the world; but within most of the western
world, individuals and organizations see themselves as making choices.

Vv

The tools of intelligence as they are fashioned in modern theories
of choice are necessary to any reasonable behavior in contemporary
society. It is difficult to see how we could, and inconceivable that we
would, fail to continue their development, refinement, and extension.
As might be expected, however, a theory and ideology of choice built
on the ideas outlined above is deficient in some obvious, elementary
ways, most conspicuously in the treatment of human goals.

Goals are thrust upon the intelligent man. We ask that he act in
the name of goals. We ask that he keep his goals consistent. We ask that
his actions be oriented to his goals. We ask that a social system
amalgamate individual goals into a collective goal. But we do not
concern ourselves with the origin of goals. Theories of individual
organizational and social choice assume actors with pre-existent values.

Since it is obvious that goals change over time and that the
character of those changes affects both the richness of personal and
social development and the outcome of choice behavior, a theory of
choice must somehow justify ignoring the phenomena. Although it is
unreasonable to ask a theory of choice to solve all of the problems of
man and his development, it is reasonable to ask how something as
conspicuous as the fluidity and ambiguity of objectives can plausibly be
ignored in a theory that is offered as a guide to human choice behavior.

There are three classic justifications. The first is that goal
development and choice are independent processes, conceptually and
behaviorally. The second is that the model of choice is never satisfied in
fact and that deviations from the model accommodate the problems of
introducing change. The third is that the idea of changing goals is so
intractable in a normative theory of choice that nothing can be said
about it. Since I am unpersuaded of the first and second justifications,
my optimism with respect to the third is somewhat greater than most
of my fellows.

The argument that goal development and choice are independent
behaviorally seems clearly false. It seems to me perfectly obvious that a
description that assumes goals come first and action comes later is
frequently radically wrong. Human choice behavior is at least as much a
process for discovering goals as for acting on them. Although it is true
enough that goals and decisions are ‘“‘conceptually” distinct, that is

420
MARCH MODEL BIAS

simply a statement of the theory. It is not defense of it. They are
conceptually distinct if we choose to make them so.

The argument that the model! is incomplete is more persuasive.
There do appear to be some critical “holes” in the system of
intelligence as described by standard theories of choice. There is
incomplete information, incomplete goal consistency, and a variety of
external processes impinging on goal development—including intuition
and tradition. What is somewhat disconcerting about the argument,
however, is that it makes the efficacy of the concepts of intelligent
choice dependent on their inadequacy. As we become more competent
in the techniques of the model, and more committed to it, the “holes”
become smaller. As the model becomes more accepted, our obligation
to modify it increases.

The final argument seems to me sensible as a general principle, but
misleading here. Why are we more reluctant to ask how human beings
might find ‘‘good” goals than we are to ask how they might make
“good” decisions? The second question appears to be a relatively
technical problem. The first seems more pretentious. It claims to say
something about alternative virtues. The appearance of pretense,
however, stems directly from the theory and the ideology associated
with it.

In fact, the conscious introduction of goal discovery as a
consideration in theories of human choice is not unknown to modern
man. For example, we have two kinds of theories of choice behavior in
human beings. One is a theory of children. The other is a theory of
adults. In the theory of childhood, we emphasize choices as leading to
experiences that develop the child’s scope, his complexity, his
awareness of the world. As parents, or psychologists, we try to lead the
child to do things that are inconsistent with his present goals because
we know (or believe) that he can only develop into an interesting
person by coming to appreciate aspects of experience that he initially
rejects.

In the theory of adulthood, we emphasize choices as a con-
sequence of our intentions. As adults, or economists, we try to take
actions that (within the limits of scarce resources) come as close as
possible to achieving our goals. We try to find improved ways of making
decisions consistent with our perceptions of what is valuable in the
world.

The asymmetry in these models is conspicuous. Adults have
constructed a model world in which adults know what is good for
themselves, but children do not. It is hard to react positively to the
conceit. The asymmetry has, in fact, stimulated a rather large number
of ideologies and reforms designed to allow children the same moral
prerogative granted to adults—the right to imagine that they know what
they want. The efforts have cut deeply into traditional child-rearing,
traditional educational policies, traditional politics, and traditional
consumer economics.

In my judgment, the asymmetry between models of choice for

A421
REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH Vol. 42, No. 4

adults and models of choice for children is awkward; but the solution
we have adopted is precisely wrong-headed. Instead of trying to adapt
the model of adults to children, we might better adapt the model of
children to adults. For many purposes, our model of children is better.
Of course, children know what they want. Everyone does. The critical
question is whether they are encouraged to develop more interesting
“wants”. Values change. People become more interesting as those
values and the interconnections made among them change.

One of the most obvious things in the world turns out to be hard
for us to accommodate in our theory of choice: A child of two will
almost always have a less interesting set of values (yes, indeed, a worse set
of values) than a child of 12. The same is true of adults. Values develop
through experience. Although one of the main natural arenas for the
modification of human values is the area of choice, our theories of
adult and organizational decision making ignore the phenomenon
entirely.

Introducing ambiguity and fluidity to the interpretation of
individual, organizational, and societal goals, obviously has implications
for behavioral theories of decision making. The main point here,
however, is not to consider how we might describe the behavior of
systems that are discovering goals as they act. Rather it is to examine
how we might improve the quality of that behavior, how we might aid
the development of interesting goals.

We know how to advise a society, an organization, or an individual
if we are first given a consistent set of preferences. Under some
conditions, we can suggest how to make decisions if the preferences are
only consistent up to the point of specifying a series of independent
constraints on the choice. But what about a normative theory of
goal-finding behavior? What do we say when our client tells us that he is
not sure his present set of values is the set of values in terms of which
he wants to act?

It is a question familiar to many aspects of ordinary life. It is a
question that friends, associates, students, college presidents, business
managers, voters, and children ask at least as frequently as they ask how
they should act within a set of consistent and stable values.

Within the context of the normative theory of choice as it exists,
the answer we give is: First determine the values, then act. The advice is
frequently useful. Moreover, we have developed ways in which we can
use conventional techniques for decision analysis to help discover value
premises and to expose value inconsistencies. These techniques involve
testing the decision implications of some successive approximations to a
set of preferences. The object is to find a consistent set of preferences
with implications that are acceptable to the person or organization
making the decisions. Variations on such techniques are used routinely
in operations research, as well as in personal counseling and analysis.

The utility of such techniques, however, apparently depends on
the assumption that a primary problem is the amalgamation or
excavation of preexistent values. The metaphors—‘‘finding oneself’,

422
MARCH MODEL BIAS

“goal clarification’, “self-discovery”, “social welfare function’,
“vevealed preference’’—are metaphors of search. If our value premises
are to be “‘constructed’’ rather than “discovered’’, our standard
procedures may be useful; but we have no a priori reason for assuming
they will.

Perhaps we should explore a somewhat different approach to the
normative question of how we ought to behave when our value
premises are not yet (and never will be) fully determined. Suppose we
treat action as a way of creating interesting goals at the same time as we
treat goals as a way of justifying action. It is an intuitively plausible and
simple idea, but one that is not immediately within the domain of
standard normative theories of intelligent choice.

Interesting people and interesting organizations construct com-
plicated theories of themselves. In order to do this, they need to
supplement the technology of reason with a technology of foolishness.
Individuals and organizations need ways of doing things for which they
have no good reason. Not always. Not usually. But sometimes. They
need to act before they think.

VI

In order to use the act of intelligent choice as a planned occasion
for discovering new goals, we apparently require some idea of sensible
foolishness. Which of the many foolish things that we might do now
will lead to attractive value consequences? The question is almost
inconceivable. Not only does it ask us to predict the value consequences
of action, it asks us to evaluate them. In what terms can we talk about
“good” changes in goals?

In effect, we are asked either to specify a set of super-goals in
terms of which alternative goals are evaluated, or to choose among
alternatives now in terms of the unknown set of values we will have at
some future time (or the distribution over time of that unknown set of
future values). The former alternative moves us back to the original
situation of a fixed set of values—now called “‘super-goals’’—and hardly
seems an important step in the direction of inventing procedures for
discovering new goals. The latter alternative seems fundamental enough,
but it violates severely our sense of temporal order. To say that we
make decisions now in terms of goals that will only be knowable later is
non sensical—as long as we accept the basic framework of the theory of
choice and its presumptions of pre-existent goals.

I do not know in detail what is required, but I think it will be
substantial. As we challenge the dogma of pre-existent goals, we will be
forced to reexamine some of our most precious prejudices: the
strictures against imitation, coercion, and rationalization. Each of those
honorable prohibitions depends on the view of man and human choice
imposed on us by conventional theories of choice.

Imitation is not necessarily a sign of moral weakness. It is a
prediction. It is a prediction that if we duplicate the behavior or

423
REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH Vol. 42, No. 4

attitudes of someone else, the chances of our discovering attractive new
goals for ourselves are relatively high. In order for imitation to be
normatively attractive we need a better theory of who should be
imitated. Such a theory seems to be eminently feasible. For example,
what are the conditions for effectiveness of a rule that you should
imitate another person whose values are in a close neighborhood of
yours? How do the chances of discovering interesting goals through
imitation change as the number of other people exhibiting the behavior
to be imitated increases?

Coercion is not necessarily an assault on individual autonomy. It
can be a device for stimulating individuality. We recognize this when we
talk about parents and children (at least sometimes). What has always
been difficult with coercion is the possibility for perversion that it
involves, not its obvious capability for stimulating change. What we
require is a theory of the circumstances under which entry into a
coercive system produces behavior that leads to the discovery of
interesting goals. We are all familiar with the tactic. We use it in
imposing deadlines, entering contracts, making commitments. What are
the conditions for its effective use? In particular, what are the
conditions for coercion in social systems?

Rationalization is not necessarily a way of evading morality. It can
be a test for the feasibility of a goal change. When deciding among
alternative actions for which we have no good reason, it may be sensible
to develop some definition of how “near’’ to intelligence alternative
“unintelligent” actions lie. Effective rationalization permits this kind of
incremental approach to changes in values. To use it effectively,
however, we require a better idea of the kinds of metrics that might be
possible in measuring value distances. At the same time, rationalization
is the major procedure for integrating newly discovered goals into an
existing structure of values. It provides the organization of complexity
without which complexity itself becomes indistinguishable from
randomness.

There are dangers in imitation, coercion, and rationalization. The
risks are too familiar to elaborate. We should, indeed, be able to
develop better techniques. Whatever those techniques may be, however,
they will almost certainly undermine the superstructure of biases
erected on purpose, consistency, and rationality. They will involve
some way of thinking about action now as occurring in terms of a set of
unknown future values.

Vi

A second requirement for a technology of foolishness is some
strategy for suspending rational imperatives toward consistency. Even if
we know which of several foolish things we want to do, we still need a
mechanism for allowing us to do it. How do we escape the logic of our
reason?

424
MARCH MODEL BIAS

Here, I think, we are closer to understanding what we need. It is
playfulness. Playfulness is the deliberate, temporary relaxation of rules
in order to explore the possibilities of alternative rules. When we are
playful, we challenge the necessity of consistency. In effect, we
announce—in advance—our rejection of the usual objections to behavior
that does not fit the standard model of intelligence.

Playfulness allows experimentation. At the same time, it
acknowledges reason. It accepts an obligation that at some point either
the playful behavior will be stopped or it will be integrated into the
structure of intelligence in some way that makes sense. The suspension
of the rules is temporary.

The idea of play may suggest three things that are, in my mind,
quite erroneous in the present context. First, play may be seen as a
kind of Mardi Gras for reason, a release of emotional tensions of virtue.
Although it is possible that play performs some such function, that is
not the function with which I am concerned. Second, play may be
seeen as part of some mystical balance of spiritual principles: Fire and
water, hot and cold, weak and strong. The intention here is much
narrower than a general mystique of balance. Third, play may be seen
as an antithesis of intelligence, so that the emphasis on the importance
of play becomes a support for simple self-indulgence. My present intent
is to propose play as an instrument of intelligence, not a substitute.

Playfulness is a natural outgrowth of our standard view of reason.
A strict insistence on purpose, consistency, and rationality limits our
ability to find new purposes. Play relaxes that insistence to allow us to
act “‘unintelligently’’ or ‘“‘irrationally”, or ‘‘foolishly’’ to explore
alternative ideas of possible purposes and alternative concepts of
behavioral consistency. And it does this while maintaining our basic
commitment to the necessity of intelligence.

Although play and reason are in this way functional complements,
they are often behavioral competitors. They are alternative styles and
alternative orientations to the same situation. There is no guarantee
that the styles will be equally well-developed. There is no guarantee
that all individuals, all organizations, or all societies will be equally
adept in both styles. There is no guarantee that all cultures will be
equally encouraging to both.

Our design problem is either to specify the best mix of styles or,
failing that, to assure that most people and most organizations most of
the time use an alternation of strategies rather than perseverate in
either one. It is a difficult problem. The optimization problem looks
extremely difficult on the face of it, and the learning situations that
will produce alternation in behavior appear to be somewhat less
common than those that produce perseveration.

Consider, for example, the difficulty of sustaining playfulness as a
style within contemporary American society. Individuals who are good
at consistent rationality are rewarded early and heavily. We define it as
intelligence, and the educational rewards of society are associated
strongly with it. Social norms press in the same direction, particularly

425
REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH Vol. 42, No. 4

for men. Many of the demands of modern organizational life reinforce
the same abilities and style preferences.

The result is that many of the most influential, best educated, and
best placed citizens have experienced a powerful overleaming with
respect to rationality. They are exceptionally good at maintaining
consistent pictures of themselves, of relating action to purposes. They
are exceptionally poor at a playful attitude toward their own beliefs,
toward the logic of consistency, or toward the way they see things as
being connected in the world. The dictates of manliness, forcefulness,
independence, and intelligence are intolerant of playful urges if they
arise. The playful urges that arise are weak ones.

The picture is probably overdrawn, but not, I believe, the
implications. For societies, for organizations, and for individuals reason
and intelligence have had the unnecessary consequence of inhibiting the
development of purpose into more complicated forms of consistency.
In order to move away from that position, we need to find some ways
of helping individuals and organizations to experiment with doing things
for which they have no good reason, to be playful with their
conception of themselves. It is a facility that requires more careful
attention than I can give it, but I would suggest five things as a small
beginning:

First, we can treat goals as hypotheses. Conventional decision
theory allows us to entertain doubts about almost everything except
the thing about which we frequently have the greatest doubt—our
objectives. Suppose we define the decision process as a time for the
sequential testing of hypotheses about goals. If we can experiment with
alternative goals, we stand some chance of discovering complicated and
interesting combinations of good values that none of us previously
imagined.

Second, we can treat intuition as real. I do not know what
intuition is, or even if it is any one thing. Perhaps it is simply an excuse
for doing something we cannot justify in terms of present values or for
refusing to follow the logic of our own beliefs. Perhaps it is an
inexplicable way of consulting that part of our intelligence that is not
organized in a way anticipated by standard theories of choice. In either
case, intuition permits us to see some possible actions that are outside
our present scheme for justifying behavior.

Third, we can treat hypocrisy as a transition. Hypocrisy is an
inconsistency between expressed values and behavior. Negative
attitudes about hypocrisy stem from two major things. The first is a
general onus against inconsistency. The second is a sentiment against
combining the pleasures of vice with the appearance of virtue.
Apparently, that is an unfair way of allowing evil to escape temporal
punishment. Whatever the merits of such a position as ethics, it seems
to me distinctly inhibiting toward change. A bad man with good
intentions may be a man experimenting with the possibility of
becoming good. Somehow it seems to me more sensible to encourage
the experimentation than to insult it.

426
MARCH MODEL BIAS

Fourth, we can treat memory as an enemy. The rules of
consistency and rationality require a technology of memory. For most
purposes, good memories make good choices. But the ability to forget,
or overlook, is also useful. If I do not know what I did yesterday or
what other people in the organization are doing today, I can act within
the system of reason and still do things that are foolish.

Fifth, we can treat experience as a theory. Learning can be viewed
as a series of conclusions based on concepts of action and consequences
that we have invented. Experience can be changed retrospectively. By
changing our interpretive concepts now, we modify what we learned
earlier. Thus, we expose the possibility of experimenting with alterna-
tive histories. The usual strictures against ‘‘self-deception”’ in experience
need occasionally to be tempered with an awareness of the extent to
which all experience is an interpretation subject to conscious revision.
Persona] histories, and national histories, need to be rewritten rather
continuously as a base for the retrospective learning of new self-
conceptions.

Each of these procedures represents a way in which we tem-
porarily suspend the operation of the system of reasoned intelligence.
They are playful. They make greatest sense in situations in which there
has been an overlearning of virtues of conventional rationality. They are
possibly dangerous applications of powerful devices more familiar to
the study of behavioral pathology than to the investigation of human
development. But they offer a few techniques for introducing change
within current concepts of choice.

The argument extends easily to the problems of social organiza-
tion. If we knew more about the normative theory of acting before you
think, we could say more intelligent things about the functions of
management and leadership when organizations or societies do not
know what they are doing. Consider, for example, the following general
implications.

First, we need to reexamine the functions of management
decision. One of the primary ways in which the goals of an organization
are developed is by interpreting the decisions it makes, and one feature
of good managerial decisions is that they lead to the development of
more interesting value premises for the organization. As a result,
decisions should not be seen as flowing directly or strictly from a
pre-existent set of objectives. Managers who make decisions might well
view that function somewhat less as a process of deduction or a process
of political negotiation, and somewhat more as a process of gently
upsetting preconceptions of what the organization is doing.

Second, we need a modified view of planning. Planning in
organizations has many virtues, but a plan can often be more effective
as an interpretation of past decisions than as a program for future ones.
It can be used as a part of the efforts of the organization to develop a
new consistent theory of itself that incorporates the mix of recent
actions into a moderately comprehensive structure of goals. Procedures
for interpreting the meaning of most past events are familiar to the

427
REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH Vol. 42, No. 4

memoirs of retired generals, prime ministers, business leaders, and
movie stars. They suffer from the company they keep. In an
organization that wants to continue to develop new objectives, a
manager needs to be relatively tolerant of the idea that he will discover
the meaning of yesterday’s action in the experiences and interpretations
of today.

Third, we need to reconsider evaluation. As nearly as I can
determine, there is nothing in a formal theory of evaluation that
requires that the criterion function for evaluation be specified in
advance. In particular, the evaluation of social experiments need not be
in terms of the degree to which they have fulfilled our a priori
expectations. Rather we can examine what they did in terms of what
we now believe to be important. The prior specification of criteria and
the prior specification of evaluational procedures that depend on such
criteria are common presumptions in contemporary social policy
making. They are presumptions that inhibit the serendipitous discovery
of new criteria. Experience should be used explicitly as an occasion for
evaluating our values as well as our actions.

Fourth, we need a reconsideration of social accountability.
Individual preferences and social action need to be consistent in some
way. But the process of pursuing consistency is one in which both the
preferences and the actions change over time. Imagination in social
policy formation involves systematically adapting to and influencing
preferences. It would be unfortunate if our theories of social action
encouraged leaders to ignore their responsibilities for anticipating
public preferences through action and for providing social experiences
that modify individual expectations.

Fifth, we need to accept playfulness in social organizations. The
design of organizations should attend to the problems of maintaining
both playfulness and reason as aspects of intelligent choice. Since much
of the literature on social design is concerned with strengthening the
rationality of decision, managers are likely to overlook the importance
of play. This is partly a matter of making the individuals within an
organization more playful by encouraging the attitudes and skills of
inconsistency. It is also a matter of making organizational structure and
organizational procedures more playful. Organizations can be playful
even when the participants in them are not. The managerial devices for
maintaining consistency can be varied. We encourage organizational
play by permitting (and insisting on) some temporary relief from
control, coordination, and communication.

Vill

Social action is built upon models of social choice. Contemporary
theories of decision making and the technology of reason have
considerably strengthened our capabilities for effective social action.
The conversion of the simple ideas of choice into an extensive
technology is a major achievement. It is, however, an achievement that

428
MARCH MODEL BIAS

has reinforced some biases in the underlying models of choice in
individuals and groups. In particular, it has reinforced the uncritical
acceptance of a static interpretation of human goals.

There is little magic in the world, and foolishness in people and
organizations is one of the many things that fail to produce miracles.
Under certain conditions, it is one of several ways in which some of the
problems of our current theories of intelligence can be overcome. It
may be a good way. It preserves the virtues of consistency while
stimulating change. If we had a good technology of foolishness, it might
(in combination with the technology of reason) help in a small way to
develop the unusual combinations of attitudes and behaviors that
describe the interesting people, interesting organizations, and
interesting societies of the world.

429
