® Check for updates

 

Article
Journalism & Communication Monographs
° ° 15(4) 219-270
Prejudice: The Role of the ©2013 AgMC
° ° Reprints and permissions:
Med la In the Development sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
e e DOI: 10.1177/15226379 13504401
of Soc I al B las jemo.sagepub.com

@SAGE

Kim Bissell! and Scott Parrott!

Abstract

Numerous studies document the existence of bias: bias against gender, race, sexual
orientation, age, mental illness, and body shape or weight. This article presents a
model of bias development, which helps explain the influence of mediated, individual,
social, and ideological influences on the development of bias. This article applies the
proposed model using four experimental studies that examine weight bias in children
and adults. The results from the four studies lend empirical support for the model.
Data from the studies suggest the explication of a theoretical model is necessary
to understand the factors related to the development of bias against a variety of
groups, character traits, or attributes in others. It is difficult to argue that any one
factor whether it be media, individual, social, or ideology “trumps” other factors as
the development of bias seems to be very individualistic. Therefore, a model that
represents the myriad of factors identified above is proposed.

Keywords
media, bias, stigma, prejudice

Introduction

Attitudes influence the way we interact with the world, including our day-to-day expe-
riences with other people, groups, and issues. We hold explicit attitudes or subjective
views of which we are cognizant. We also hold implicit attitudes and associations that
we might not even recognize because they are unconscious or automatic. But how do
these attitudes—these prejudices or biases—develop? Certainly, the media inform our
attitudes toward other people. Whether fact or fiction, media content involves plots

 

‘University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, USA

Corresponding Author:

Kim Bissell, Professor, Department of Journalism, University of Alabama, P.O. Box 870172, Tuscaloosa,
AL 35487, USA.

Email: kbissell@ua.edu
220 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

centered on social actors. We draw inferences about people—even real-life people—
based on the attitudes and behaviors of these social actors. Indeed, social scientists
have examined media content and how it influences our social perception using prim-
ing,! cultivation,? framing, social cognitive theory,* and other popular theories of
mass communication. The research suggests that media often provide audiences ste-
reotypical portraits of people based on how old they are,* their race/ethnicity,® their
mental health,’ their gender,’ the amount they weigh,° and a host of other traits.
Furthermore, exposure to media content may influence audiences’ attitudes and/or
beliefs about race,!° body shape/size,'! age,!? sexuality,!? mental health,'* and other
characteristics. Simply put, media content often contains stereotypes about social
groups, and a growing body of research is examining how the media may help nurture
(or mitigate) stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination.

Nevertheless, media alone cannot explain how people form prejudice, which is a
positive or negative evaluation of a person based on the social group to which they
belong (or don’t). Instead, people bring individual, social, and ideological backgrounds
into the viewing or listening environment. As the literature in social psychology
shows, these factors can have profound effects on the formation, experience, and
expression of prejudice. Therefore, we advocate a more holistic approach for the study
of media and prejudice. When social scientists consistently account for mediated, indi-
vidual, social, and ideological factors, our understanding of prejudice deepens. So,
too, does our understanding of how mediated environments shape our perceptions of
the people in the world around us. This study presents a theoretical model of bias
development, which helps explain these four classifications of influence on the devel-
opment and reinforcement of bias. Later in the monograph, the study applies the pro-
posed model using four experimental studies that examine weight bias in children and
adults. The results support the model, showing that mediated, individual, social, and
ideological factors inform the development of implicit and explicit prejudice.

Before explicating and testing the model, the monograph first reviews literature on
mediated, individual, social, and ideological factors involved in the development of
bias from a viewpoint that melds mass communications and social psychology.
Second, the study reviews relevant theories and conceptual models, including their
limitations. Third, results from four experimental studies examining weight bias are
summarized, which help shape the development of the proposed model. Fourth, the
study presents the proposed model of bias development. Finally, the study examines
ways in which the model may inform future research. Thus, the significance of the
present work is that it merges theories and findings from several disciplines in a way
that provides meaningful and valuable understanding as it relates to the development
of bias. Finally, the inclusion of media exposure as a correlate or precursor of bias
contributes to and advances knowledge in a meaningful way.

While certain prejudices may be less overt today than in decades past, they con-
tinue to influence modern beliefs, emotions, and behavior. Nevertheless, certain social
characteristics remain openly stigmatized in the United States, including the focus of
the studies outlined here: obesity. The prevalence of obesity drastically increased
since the 1990s, topping 20% in every state by 2011.!° Obesity carries significant
mental health consequences, partly because American society stigmatizes heavy body
Bissell and Parrott 221

 

shapes and sizes. Indeed, a growing body of literature indicates that obese or over-
weight people are discriminated against or stigmatized in a number of areas, including
social settings, school, and the workplace.'!® What remains unknown is how weight-
based prejudice forms. Like many other prejudices, negative weight-based attitudes
manifest during childhood. Children and adolescents assign negative personality and
character traits to overweight peers,!’ perceiving obese youths as lazy, less confident,
less healthy, and less attractive. While negative stereotypes and weight-based atti-
tudes are well documented, we understand less about their precursors and the role of
media content in the formation of social bias. The present article addresses the gap,
beginning with an explication of prejudice.

Prejudice

Prejudice is a form of attitude, which Gordon Allport labeled as “probably the most
distinctive and indispensable concept in contemporary American social psychology”
(p. 798).!9 More than seventy-five years later, attitude remains an indispensable con-
cept in psychology, mass communications, and other fields of social scientific inquiry.
Perhaps because of its ubiquitous nature, the attitude concept has not been defined in
one overarching way. Attitude has been defined as a general and enduring positive or
negative evaluation of an attitude object, which includes people, issues, events, and
other targets.?° It also has been defined using memory-based approaches, including
Fazio’s conceptualization of attitude as an association between an evaluation and
object.?! Recent research has questioned whether attitudes are necessarily enduring, or
perhaps constructed on the spot using information available during the particular con-
text.* Therefore, the research presented here uses the more holistic and general con-
ceptualization provided by Eagly and Chaiken, who defined attitude as “a psychological
tendency that is expressed by evaluating a particular entity with some degree of favor
or disfavor” (p. 1).2? In the case of prejudice and bias, the “particular entity” is a per-
son, and the favor or disfavor is based on group-based characteristics such as weight,
race, gender, religion, mental health. While conceptual definitions differ, most schol-
ars agree that attitudes involve some form of evaluation. In the “umbrella” conceptu-
alization provided by Eagly and Chaiken, evaluation includes “all classes of evaluative
responding, whether overt or covert, cognitive, affective, or behavioral” (p. 1).¥
Attitudes last at least a short period of time, and the use of the term here makes allow-
ances for the debate about the temporal nature of attitudes.

Attitudes include three classes of antecedents: cognitive, affective, and behav-
ioral.24 People may use previous behaviors as the basis of an attitude, as people
prefer to maintain consistency. In addition, affect may shape attitudes, an assump-
tion underlying research in classical conditioning. When an individual repeatedly
suffers an electric shock following exposure to a stimulus object, he or she may
quickly associate the object and negative affect even when the punishment no longer

*For a review see Gerd Bohner and Nina Dickel, “Attitudes and Attitude Change,” Annual
Review of Psychology 62 (2011): 391-417.
222 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

occurs. Conversely, positive affect may be attached to attitude objects when the
association is constructed through reward rather than punishment. The cognitive
component includes an individual’s beliefs. Petty and Cacioppo defined beliefs as
“the information that a person has about other people, objects, and issues” (p. 7).25
Beliefs may be factual or based on personal opinion, and they may be accurate or
inaccurate.2° For example, stereotypes are a type of belief that is based on social
group membership. A common stereotype concerning mental illness is that it makes
a person dangerous and unpredictable. Informed by an unfounded belief, a person
may negatively evaluate a person who has mental illness. The evaluation would
represent an attitude. In fact, it would represent the specific type of attitude investi-
gated here, prejudice.

While the concept of prejudice certainly informs research involving race rela-
tions, scholars have also studied prejudice based on age, gender, sexuality, mental
health, weight, and other social categories. Certain areas of research, including
weight-based prejudice, sometimes use the terms “bias” and “stigmatization” inter-
changeably with prejudice. The research presented here differentiates among the
terms. As prejudice often invokes negative connotations, the word bias may better
represent the underlying meaning because most people likely would agree that bias
may be positive or negative. Bias and prejudice may inform discrimination, which
occurs when an individual is treated differently based on group membership. It is
also a component of stigmatization, an overall process in which a person is labeled
(or socially categorized), stereotyped, and discriminated against within a power
environment.?’ Bias and prejudice may lead to discrimination, but sometimes that
belief is not something an individual is even aware of as attitudes may be implicit or
explicit in nature.

Implicit and Explicit Attitudes

Much scholarly attention has examined the formation of attitudes—evaluations of the
self, individuals, groups, and other objects**—and in the course of examining this area
of social psychology, the focus of research has shifted from understanding explicit
attitudes—attitudes that people can consciously report and attitudes that can be con-
sciously controlled—to examining implicit attitudes—attitudes for which people do
not have conscious access and “for which activation cannot be controlled” (p. 239).29
Greenwald and Banaji suggest the key difference between implicit and explicit atti-
tudes is they represent what an individual is consciously aware of, or not, or whether
an individual responds automatically or in a controlled fashion.*° Bargh, Chaiken,
Govender, and Pratto and Fazio, Sanbonmatsu, Powell, and Kardes argue that attitudes
are activated outside of conscious attention, and this happens because the activation is
occurring more rapidly than can be managed by conscious activity.3! Negative beliefs
and attitudes have been identified at the explicit and implicit level based on weight,*?
race,** mental illness,*4 and other characteristics. No matter the stigmatized condition
under study, research suggests mediated, individual, social, and ideological factors
shape our attitudes.
Bissell and Parrott 223

 

Factors Relevant in Understanding the Development of
Bias

Media Influences

Media are often inescapable in today’s environment, and the messages media outlets
disseminate surely shape the way we perceive the world and other people. It has been
suggested that the mass media are the most potent and pervasive communicators of
sociocultural standards in America.*> Accordingly, it is important to examine media as
a driving component in the development of prejudice. The average American adult
spends 5.20 hours watching television each day and 3 hours per day using computers
and the Internet. Children are also “glued” to the screen, whether it is TV (4.29 hours
per day) or portable technology such as cellular phones (2 hours per day either talking
or texting).

The ubiquitous nature of the media means we are bombarded with messages about
what characteristics and groups should be sanctioned or shunned, what we should
think about, how we should behave toward others, and what we might expect from
people based on the groups to which they belong. The media primarily shape prejudice
through two routes: disseminating inaccurate information about social groups (includ-
ing stereotypes), and informing audience members how society behaves toward and
thinks about social categories. Perhaps the demand placed on media producers, who
are responsible for condensing large amounts of information into short segments and
articles, should be blamed for the presence of stereotypical content. However, stereo-
types are products of normal cognitive processes*° and may therefore appear in media
content through sheer accident. Regardless, inaccurate information about social groups
frequently appears in television programs, newspapers, magazines, novels, and other
media outlets. For example, the media frequently portray people with mental illness as
violent, dangerous, unstable, unpredictable, and socially undesirable.*’ Stereotypes
based on race/ethnicity,** gender,*® sexuality,*° age,*! and other social categories are
also prevalent in American television, newspapers, magazines, movies, and other
forms of media content. In regard to weight bias, content analyses suggest that media
content often endorses the “thin ideal,” providing audience members inaccurate, often
unattainable, and potentially harmful models for the preferred body shape and size. An
overall message of “Thin is in, Stout is out’? is prevalent in everything from adoles-
cent fiction to women’s magazines.“ Add to the overrepresentation of the thin ideal
in a mediated context the representation of overweight in a stereotypical fashion, and
viewers are left with perceptions about overweight individuals that might be negative.
Overweight characters are subjected to negative remarks, both self-imposed and other-
generated, more often than thin characters in situation comedies.** Overweight charac-
ters are more likely to be shown eating, and less likely to be in a serious romantic
relationship than thin characters.** The television world also underestimates the preva-
lence of the overweight population—most characters are of thin or average build, con-
trasting real-world statistics.47 Only 14% of female characters and 24% of male
224 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

characters in the top ten prime-time fictional programs of 1999 to 2000 were portrayed
as overweight or obese—less than half their percentages in the general population.®
Finally, television may also reinforce the ridicule of overweight or obese characters by
playing audience applause when an overweight character becomes the subject of nega-
tive commentary.“°

A growing body of research, including the four experiments outlined here, is exam-
ining how stereotypical media content may nurture stereotypes, prejudice, and dis-
crimination. So far the findings are clear: stereotypical media content informs people’s
attitudes toward others on the basis of race, gender, age, and other characteristics.
Media effects occur via several mechanisms.

Stereotypical media content may activate stereotypes, making them more readily
available for subsequent information processing and perception tasks (priming).
Informed by the network model of memory,°® media priming presents one of most
theoretically and empirically robust mass communication approaches to explaining
the mechanisms by which media nurture stereotypes and prejudice. The network
model assumes that concepts are linked in memory by associative pathways. The path-
ways form a network, such that priming one concept (“doctor”) will activate closely
related concepts (“nurse,” “hospital”) and make them more readily available for appli-
cation in subsequent decision- and impression-making tasks. For example, audience
members primed with the “mammie” or “jezebel’” stereotype through media content
later reported congruent attitudes and perceptions when they were asked to rate a black
female job applicant.5! The strength of the priming effect depends on the recency of
the priming event and the frequency with which concepts are associated and acti-
vated.*? The network model assumes that the priming effect dissipates with time, often
within minutes or even seconds of the priming event. Through priming, media content
may influence our perceptions of people based on race,** gender,*4 mental health,*
and other characteristics. The network model may in fact help explain the formation of
attitudes through the repeated pairing of concepts by personal experience, friends,
family, ideologies, and the media, especially when one takes the constructionist posi-
tion that attitudes are formed on the spot in reaction to contextual circumstances. The
temporal nature of media priming limits its power as an explanation for the formation
of prejudice. While media priming effects may dissipate within minutes or even sec-
onds, prejudiced attitudes appear longer lasting. Indeed, television content may nur-
ture misconceptions about the prevalence and characteristics of social groups after
long-term exposure (cultivation). Cultivation represents another relevant and popular
theory. Simply put, cultivation theory predicts people who watch significant amounts
of television will report worldviews more in-line with television portrayals than peo-
ple who spend little time with the TV. Television became “the great storyteller” of our
time, replacing pastors, parents, teachers, and traditional cultural communicators.*¢
Early cultivation theorists consider the homogeneity of television content potentially
problematic, because the mass messages were essentially being conveyed to mass
audiences by few communicators.*’ In other words, a few corporations controlled the
airwaves, disseminating similar messages to dissimilar cultures around the world.
Gerbner predicted a “mainstreaming” effect would occur when cultures were
Bissell and Parrott 225

 

inundated with these homogeneous messages. Cultures ultimately would assimilate
and adopt worldviews reflecting the dominant, mainstream, corporate message. While
cultivation remains a heavily cited theory in the top communication journals, scholars
focused less on the “corporate control” component of the theory and more on how
heavy and light television viewers differ in their attitudes toward issues, events, and
people. Certainly, television provides audiences stereotypical portrayals based on gen-
der,°® mental illness,>9 race,® weight,®! sexuality,°2 and other characteristics.
Cultivation theory predicts heavy television viewers would report more stereotypical
and prejudiced views than light television viewers. For example, Morgan found that
male and female adolescent students who watched more television had higher scores
on sexism measures than those who watched less television.©? Addressing the primary
criticism concerning cultivation theory, more recent research examined availability
heuristics as the cognitive mechanism by which cultivation effects occur.*+ The
research suggests heavy television exposure enhances the heuristic in viewers’ mem-
ory, making particular cognitive associations more salient and therefore more appli-
cable for estimations, attitude reports, and other tasks.®> Despite recent advances,
cultivation theory is an inadequate explanation for the factors contributing to prejudice
and social bias. The theory primarily focuses on the role of the media in attitude for-
mation, discounting individual characteristics as an important contributor to bias.
Cultivation effects should occur regardless of an individual’s race, gender, and socio-
economic background. Instead, cultivation theory predicts differences in worldviews
according to the amount of television an individual watches. Therefore, the theory is
inadequate for explaining the phenomena studied here. Cultivation as a single theory
of bias development does not account for individual differences in those consuming
media; however, when considered with other theoretical frameworks that might
explain how individual factors might covary with media consumption, the theory may
prove more useful.

When people sit down to the TV, newspaper, magazine, or other media, they may
differentially process the information they encounter based on existing cognitive
approaches (cognitive-experiential self-theory). Cognitive-experiential self-theory is a
broadly integrated theory of personality that is grounded in the distinction between
two independent information processing systems: an experiential system that pro-
cesses information simply and automatically, and a rational system that operates based
on an individual’s understanding of logic and reasoning.®* In more simplistic terms,
Epstein describes the experiential system as one that is intuitive, concrete, and affec-
tive, and the rational system as one that is logical, abstract, and conscious.* Theorists
of Cognitive Experiential Self Theory (CEST) suggest that the experiential processing
system in humans is similar to the system by which animals adapt to their environ-
ments, by learning from experiences rather than making decisions via logical or ratio-
nal inference. Epstein argues that even though the experiential system is part of a
cognitive system, its existence is closely related to the experience of affect (p. 5)
because if an individual is learning from experience, those experiences will likely trig-
ger a positive or negative affect or reinforcement. In the context of this study, if an
individual is exposed to the negative treatment of others who are overweight via a
226 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

mediated context or personal venue, that individual may be influenced on an affective
level, causing the individual to feel one way or another about the overweight individ-
ual. In some cases, an individual might be more sympathetic or empathetic to similar
others, but in other cases, the individual may be more susceptible to believe that there
are numerous disadvantages associated with being overweight. By its basic definition
and by the distinct differences between the two systems—one operating more on the
conscious level and the other operating more on the unconscious level—it is argued
that this theory serves as a foundation by which implicit and explicit attitudes are
formed.

Media content may highlight certain bits of information, such as stereotypes, while
ignoring others, making the information more salient (framing). Finally, audiences
may learn from the behaviors and consequences of media personalities, and later
model the behavior in the real world (social cognitive theory of mass communication).
Children’s videos frequently stress the importance of physical appearance, including
thin body shape.® Conversely, overweight characters in top-rated television programs
endure ridicule and demonstrate stereotypical traits such as gluttony and social
ineptitude.”°

As the theories demonstrate, media content may be particularly influential in atti-
tude formation and change especially when an individual knows nothing about the
relevant attitude object or holds particularly malleable dispositions toward the target.
For example, a child who knows nothing about mental illness may learn through
Saturday morning cartoons to associate words such as “crazy” and “nuts” with social
exclusion, violence, and negative valence, especially when family, friends, school,
and other sources of influence provide no contradicting information. However, people
rarely—if ever—have blank mental slates for social categories when they enter the
media environment. Therefore, the likelihood is greater that an individual audience
member enters the mediated environment carrying preexisting prejudices, which influ-
ence the way in which the person processes the content and, in turn, experiences atti-
tude formation, reinforcement, or change. Overall, three additional categories appear
to interact with mass media to influence prejudice: ideological factors, including polit-
ical affiliation and religiosity; social influences, including familial and interpersonal
environments; and individual characteristics, including personal experience with
social groups and knowledge about social groups.

Individual Influences

The very processes involved in social categorization represent an important and abun-
dant line of scientific inquiry in psychology, presenting media researchers important
information about how individual characteristics may inform our reactions to media
content. Humans automatically classify other people based on race, gender, age, and
other characteristics.”! Categorization triggers associated concepts in memory, such
that relevant stereotypes—or beliefs—come to mind when one person encounters
another. As stereotypes are activated, they are more readily accessible for application
in decision making, attitude expression, and behavior. It remains debated whether an
Bissell and Parrott 227

 

individual can control the influence of activated stereotypes on subsequent perception
and behavior,” and research also has produced differing results on how stereotype
activation influences subsequent information processing and memory. While some
research suggests that stereotype-congruent information may be better encoded (as the
cognitive associations are already existent), other researchers found stereotype-
incongruent information is better encoded, presumably because the information sur-
prised participants and elicited greater attention. While people differentiate among
in-group members, we tend to perceive out-group members in more homogeneous
terms. In addition, the simple division between in-group and out-group, which occurs
automatically and outside one’s conscious awareness, has consequences. People tend
to automatically perceive out-group members in more negative terms than in-group
members. While not prejudice, stereotypes certainly play a major role in our percep-
tions of others based on group membership. Indeed, research has shown that anti-fat
bias (AFB) is stronger in people who believe the primary cause of obesity is a lack of
exercise and poor nutrition, rather than genetics.” Stereotypes may serve several func-
tions for the social perceiver, aiding cognition and in-group cohesion, and providing
boosts in self-esteem through the disparagement of another “different” person.
Stereotypes essentially serve as cognitive shortcuts or heuristics. Therefore, an indi-
vidual who prefers effortful thinking may be less inclined to rely on stereotypes when
making judgments about other people. In other words, thoughtful people may be less
dependent on group-based beliefs and individuate between a target and the social
group to which the other individual belongs. Conversely, people who are cognitive
misers or experiencing heavy cognitive load may be more reliant on stereotypes, and
therefore more likely to demonstrate prejudice. In an interesting example, Bodenhausen
found that people were more likely to stereotype during nonoptimal times of day. In
other words, morning people demonstrated greater reliance on stereotypes at night,
while “night owls” were more prone to stereotype in the morning.” The reasoning is
that the cognitive ability is highest during an individual’s optimal time of day.

In addition, personal factors may influence the way one individual perceives others,
including gender, age, ethnicity, and, when it comes to AFB, their own weight.7> Much
of the literature examining weight bias represents studies with children who may have
some degree of bias at an earlier age but that bias will grow stronger or continue as the
child grows older. Research examining the role of gender in weight bias has resulted
in conflicting findings at best. While some research suggests no relation between gen-
der and weight bias,” others” reported significant differences between boys and girls
when it came to weight-based attitudes. While girls rated over- and average-weight
targets more negatively than a thin target, boys only assessed overweight targets more
negatively.’’ Furthermore, weight-based teasing and victimization of overweight indi-
viduals were reported more by girls than boys in a study by Eisenberg, Neumark-
Sztainer, and Story.”

Age is another important variable in understanding the factors related to AFB, or
potentially, other types of bias. Research suggests that weight bias, if existent in a
child, would only worsen as the child gets older.8° What is less certain is the age at
which weight bias begins. Despite the idiosyncratic nature of weight bias, earlier
228 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

studies do suggest that many of these demographic variables such as age offer a
glimpse of how bias continues throughout a child’s growth and development. Cramer
and Steinwert found that preschool children as young as three years and four years old
were able to identify a target’s excess body weight as the reason for negative atti-
tudes,*! and Lawson found that boys in second, fourth, and sixth grades demonstrated
increasingly stronger negative attitudes toward overweight targets as they got older.*?
Similar studies have found age to be a relevant predictor of other types of bias such as
bias against physically disabled individuals or bias against individuals of another
ethnicity.

Finally, ethnicity is another important variable in understanding the individual fac-
tors related to AFB. A few studies have examined whether children of different eth-
nicities and different cultural backgrounds are more or less likely to have anti-fat
attitudes and weight bias. In a study of college students’ perceptions of weight bias,
Latner and Stunkard reported that African American females had more positive atti-
tudes toward obese peers than did Caucasian males and females.*? However, a recent
study examining weight bias in Caucasian and Hispanic middle school students found
that regardless of the participants’ ethnicity or gender, weight bias was evident, and
that there were no statistically significant differences across the ethnic groups.

Social Influences

While Gordon Allport blamed conformity for half of all prejudice, modern theorists
say the figure may be an underestimate.*4 As Crandall and Stangor noted, “Conformity
in matters of prejudice is not occasional, and is probably not to blame for merely half
of all prejudices, but instead seems to form the very core of the majority of people’s
prejudices” (p. 305).®° Conformity represents a specific form of social influence, one
in which an individual changes his or her opinion to match others to maintain social
appearances, avoid punishment, or to simply be accurate. Normative information, or
beliefs about what others find socially acceptable, can exert significant influence over
prejudice, including its formation and expression. For example, Crandall, Eshleman,
and O’Brien found a relationship between self-reported prejudice toward social groups
and participants’ perceptions of whether society would accept negative attitudes
toward the group.®* Social influence may also be readily seen in mediated environ-
ments: just turn on the television, choose a situation comedy, and you will encounter
social influence in action through the producers’ use of canned applause and laughter.
As canned laughter influences audience members’ perceptions of media content,*’ one
might expect the viewing environment (friends, family, studio applause) would also
sway how an individual processes media content. Put simply, stereotypical media con-
tent may demonstrate greater influence over audience members when they perceive
social support for the messages, including messages of prejudice based on race, gen-
der, age, mental health, and weight.

Normative information represents only one social factor in prejudice. Indeed, our
biases are heavily influenced by friends, family, and the households and communities
in which we reside. As noted, peers may communicate what actions, ideas, and
Bissell and Parrott 229

 

feelings are acceptable or condemnable. Peers communicate information, including
stereotypes, which may contribute to our beliefs about other races, genders, religions,
and social attributes. Furthermore, they represent our “in-group,” providing bench-
marks by which we judge out-group members. Indeed, people endorse negative stereo-
types about out-group members because it results in a collective self-esteem boost for
the in-group. Humans are indeed social animals, and this connection with other people
means we are readily susceptible to influence even in matters of prejudice.

In adults and even adolescents, the social environment in regard to weight bias—
including the number of friends an individual has who are overweight and the preva-
lence of overweight/obesity in the household environment—may relate to the
development or reinforcement of perceptions or beliefs about people who are over-
weight. Parenting styles or parent behavior may also be a predictor of children’s views
on weight. For example, Field and colleagues found that mothers who frequently
attempt to lose weight might negatively influence their children.** Whether an indi-
vidual comes from an individualist or collectivist cultural background may also influ-
ence his or her biases toward and against other people. When Beatty measured degrees
of individualism, collectivism, and attitudes toward the elderly in European American
and Asian American college students, he found a negative correlation between col-
lectivism and negative attitudes toward older adults.°?

Ideological Influences

In addition to individual and social backgrounds, people bring existing ideologies and
orientations into the viewing, listening, or reading environment that may influence the
extent to which media content nurtures prejudice. People exhibit different levels of
religiosity and follow diverse religious doctrines. They endorse different issue-based
stances and align with separate political parties. A person’s religiosity, political back-
ground, or ideology may help determine whether he or she consumes specific media
content,°° and how he or she views other people and normative behavior concerning
social groups. Furthermore, an individual’s social dominance orientation has been
shown to be a strong predictor of both political and social attitudes.°! Granted, indi-
vidual and social influences feed into an individual’s ideology. Parents communicate
religious beliefs to their children, who in turn endorse the beliefs themselves.
Children often develop political affiliations based on parental influence.°? Nevertheless,
we differentiate between ideology and the three other factors because of its specific
role in prejudice. For example, political affiliation has been shown to influence atti-
tudes related to race®* and mental illness.

Weight-based attitudes research also supports the premise. O’Brien, Hunter, and
Banks found a link between ideology and anti-fat attitudes among college students
studying physical education (PE).°° Students three years into the PE program, and
more indoctrinated in the PE environment, exhibited higher levels of bias against
weight than psychology students and PE students only a year into the program.
Furthermore, while difficult to test empirically, cultures that embrace beauty and thin-
ness or equate success with beauty and thinness may have an implicit or explicit bias
230 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

against overweight. As a society or culture upholds specific cultural icons as it relates
to appearance, messages about what is acceptable or not begin to filter down through-
out communities. In this sense, an ideological bias against weight could be evident and
could lead to bias against overweight.

Introduction to the Current Work

As noted, several theories help explain the development of bias. They represent diverse
fields of research, including mass communication, social psychology, sociology, and
other paradigms. Social learning,” priming,°* and cultivation” theories have informed
much of the quantitative research examining the media’s influence on bias. Earlier, we
noted the key assumptions, predictions, and explanations offered by each theory.
While the theories certainly inform our understanding of media and prejudice, they
cannot provide a holistic account of the precursors of prejudice. Therefore, we present
here a model in which mediated, individual, social, and ideological variables interact
in the development of prejudice. The approach is largely individualistic. Other theo-
ries may touch on more than one dimension of bias development but still fall shy of
completely explaining the phenomenon. For example, framing may help explain the
way in which the media produce stigmatizing content as well as the underlying psy-
chological mechanisms involved in processing the content.!°° In essence, the concep-
tual model may help explain the role of both the media and the individual in the
development of bias. Similarly, cultivation theory may help explain the way in which
our consumption of the media, particularly heavy television viewing, influences our
perceptions of the world.!°! More recent studies examined the underlying psychologi-
cal processes of cultivation theory, proposing that heavy television viewing may influ-
ence the availability heuristic.!°* Therefore, cultivation theory might explain both the
mediated and individual factors. While several theoretical and conceptual models
were developed in psychology and sociology, mass communications scholars also use
the theories to help explain phenomena. For example, the basic premise of social com-
parison theory is that we make judgments about ourselves based on the model set by
others. While the theory primarily explains the social factor in bias development, espe-
cially weight stigmatization, communications scholars extended the theory into the
mediated setting.! Similarly, social learning theory proposes that we learn by watch-
ing others—both in vivo and mediated settings—and behave based on the rewards,
punishment, or lack of punishment generated through the witnessed actions.!™ Social
cognitive theory, an outgrowth of social learning theory, comes closest to explaining
the influence of the individual, social, ideological, and media factors in the develop-
ment of bias.

The literature reviewed and the theoretical frameworks summarized above provide
a framework by which an empirical investigation of bias could be conducted. This
study reports the findings from a series of experiments conducted by the authors.
Findings from these studies lay the foundation for the proposed model, as each tests
one or several of the factors discussed as possible levels of influence in the develop-
ment of bias. The studies below were tested to identify correlates or precursors of
Bissell and Parrott 231

 

AFB; however, as will be explained below, the levels of influence explicated here
could be used to explain the development of other types of bias.

Summary of Methodologies Used

Four separate studies were conducted over the course of four years to better under-
stand the factors influencing the development of bias against overweight and obese
individuals. Study procedures were similar across the four studies, and the indepen-
dent and dependent measures only varied in word usage and sentence length. These
decisions were based on the age and literacy rate of the sample participants. The
objective of each of the four studies was to identify correlates or precursors to weight
bias. Thus, in each of the four studies, a between-subjects experiment was con-
ducted. With this design, we were able to prime participants with an image of an
overweight or thin subject and then use cognitive and attitudinal measures to assess
participants’ weight bias. The first experiment was conducted with children, and this
study was simplest in terms of measures and factors related to bias against over-
weight individuals. After analysis of the findings from the first study, a second
experiment was designed, also with children, with more comprehensive measures
that represented several predicted levels of influence of bias. At the same time as
Study 2 was being conducted, a purposive sample was used to find individuals who
identified as currently having weight issues or previously having weight issues, and
data from this project are represented in Study 3. Last, a final study was done with
another adult sample; however, participants in this study were recruited from under-
graduate and graduate classes at two universities in the South. The design of each
study was built upon the findings from the subsequent study such that a more com-
prehensive understanding of bias and the development of bias could be gained.
Finally, the objective of all studies was to identify the factors—individual, social,
media, or ideological—that might be the strongest predictors of bias in each of the
four separate samples.

Procedures

All four studies discussed below were experiments, and in one of the four cases, a
within- and between-subjects experimental design was used. This was to allow for
longitudinal data collection and to also see how attitudes about weight changed in
children over time. In all four studies, participants completed an online instrument and
addressed items related to self-perception, peer and family influence, household diet-
ing behavior, eating and exercise behavior, eating and exercise attitudes, and media
exposure. Participants in all four studies also completed a modified version of the
Implicit Association Test (IAT), designed to measure attitudes related to weight. The
original study (Study 1) was designed to examine the correlates of weight bias in chil-
dren, and each subsequent study was modified, revised, or expanded based on the
results from the earlier study.
232 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

Stimulus

As the goal of each study was to identify correlates or precursors to weight bias, we
wanted to have multiple measures of the key outcome variable—AFB. Thus, we used
two separate measures of AFB, one that was more global in nature that measured gen-
eral attitudes toward overweight, and the second that measured participant responses
to an image they were exposed to via the stimulus. In two of the five groups for each
of the four studies, participants were exposed to an image of an overweight man/boy
or woman/girl. The purpose was to see whether exposure to an overweight individual
might trigger greater amounts of bias against overweight. To facilitate responses to
photographs of overweight and thin children/adults (child participants viewed images
of children; adult participants viewed images of adults), participants were randomly
selected for one of the following groups: exposure to an image of an overweight
female, exposure to an image of the same female who was thinner, exposure to an
image of an overweight male, exposure to an image of the same male who was thinner,
and no image exposure. Identification of the subjects used as stimuli in two of the four
experiments was based on a pilot test of sixteen images of thin and overweight males
and females using another sample of other children and adults. Sixteen children par-
ticipated in the pilot test of images to be used in the studies with children, and sixteen
adults participated in the pilot test of images to be used in the studies with adults. The
images selected for use in the project were “before” pictures of males and females who
had participated in weight-loss camps or weight-loss treatment programs. For the
“overweight” treatment groups (one male, one female), full body images were selected.
Both photographs showed the subjects smiling so that no negative affect would be
associated with facial expression. The subjects were photographed in bathing suits for
the before and after images so that confounding factors could be eliminated. For the
“thin” treatment groups, “after” images of the same male and female were used, and
the images were enhanced in Photoshop so that the “thin” treatment group was exposed
to an image of a clearly thin person. The fifth treatment group did not view an image.

The dependent measures for all four studies were similar: two measures of explicit
bias. For the first measure, participants’ attitudes about the subject viewed in the stim-
ulus photograph were measured. Participants randomly assigned to one of four treat-
ment groups were asked seven questions related to the subject viewed in the photograph.
Statements used in each experiment were items such as “This girl/boy/woman/man
looks like one of my friends,” “I think this girl/boy/woman/man is pretty” (for the boy/
male treatment groups, the term attractive was used), “I think this girl/boy/woman/
man is athletic,” and “I think this girl/boy/woman/man is popular.” Using responses to
the statements, an additive scale was created that measured explicit bias against the
subjects viewed in the photographs. Reliability of this scale across the four studies
ranged from a .68 to a .90, with the higher reliability coming in the two studies con-
ducted with adults.

The second measure of explicit bias was a modification of Crandall’s Anti-Fat
Attitudes scale, using the subscale of dislike.!°> This measure tapped into more general
attitudinal bias against individuals who were overweight, as the items were not related
specifically to the subject used in the stimulus. It is acknowledged that viewing an
Bissell and Parrott 233

 

overweight subject in the stimulus may have primed participants to think negatively
about overweight individuals. However, the two scales measuring explicit AFB were
separated by several filler questions and by the cognitive processing questions in each
of the four studies. The original scale items used the word “fat.” Instead, the word
“overweight” was used to make sure that we did not perpetuate additional bias against
obesity and weight. We rephrased sentences that were originally designed to be asked
in a negative way such as “It is disgusting when a fat person wears a bathing suit” or
“T would not be friends with a fat person.” Instead, we used positive wording: “Only
thin people look good in a bathing suit” and “I will only be friends with kids who are
thin.” For this measure, an additive scale was again created using responses to five
items.

Cognitive processing styles were measured in all four studies, with the only varia-
tion across the studies being the simplicity of the sentences used. Two separate scales
were used to measure what type of cognitive processing style participants were more
comfortable with—tational or experiential. The first scale was derived from responses
to the Rational-Experiential Inventory (REI) that measured cognitive predilections
toward rational processing. Items included statements such as “I enjoy a challenge that
makes me think hard,” “I try to avoid situations that require thinking in depth about
something,” and “I prefer complex problems to simple problems.” The second scale
also came from the REI-A version (REI-A) that gauges cognitive predilections toward
intuitive processing. Items used for this scale included statements such as “Using my
gut feelings usually works for me in figuring out problems in my life,” “I believe in
trusting my instincts,” and “I tend to use my feelings to guide my actions.”

Along with the two measures of explicit bias, the studies used a modification of the
IAT. The measure examines associations between target groups and beliefs and has
been used to measure attitudes related to gender, ethnicity, and weight. The measure
is more commonly used in adult samples and timed. We removed the timed compo-
nent from our studies with children because we did not want the youths to feel pressure
or stress associated with the “test.” Participants were presented with adjectives that
were to be assigned to one of two target groups: “thin” and “overweight.” The
Greenwald and Banaji test used the words “thin” and “fat.” Again, we used the word
“overweight” rather than “fat” because we did not want to perpetuate negative con-
notations.!% In all four studies, participants were shown twenty different positive and
negative adjectives, representing a wide range of personality and physical attributes:
athleticism (athletic/not athletic), intelligence (smart/stupid), motivation (motivated/
lazy), popularity (popular/not popular), attractiveness (attractive/unattractive), and
goodness (good/bad). Participants were instructed to place each adjective into the
“thin” or “overweight” category. Participants were not able to place an adjective into
both categories. The version of the IAT used in all four studies was used as a control
variable and independent variable (IV) in several hypothesis tests.

The independent measures for all studies were also similar, although with each
subsequent study, new measures were added to the instrument. Below, we will iden-
tify the common variables across the studies and then describe the measures that were
added in subsequent studies. For each of the four studies, the following independent or
control variables were used: one measure of implicit bias, demographics, media
234 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

exposure, the home environment, attitudes toward eating and exercise, and fear of
negative appearance evaluation (or a related measure of body dissatisfaction). Below,
we will discuss the specifics of each study with regard to the sampling and the inde-
pendent and control variables used.

Study |—Participantst

To examine the relationship between possible predictors of weight bias, a 2 x 5 facto-
rial design (Gender x Instrument version, between subjects) was used with children in
Grades 3 to 6 in several counties in a state in the South. Participants were 601 boys and
girls ranging in age between seven and thirteen. About 21% of the sample was in third
grade, 19% was in fourth grade, 30% was in fifth grade, and 24% was in sixth grade.
Of the 601 participants, 45% were boys and 55% were girls with ethnic representation
that was closely matched to that of the counties where data were collected: 80% of the
sample was Caucasian, 16% was African American, and the remaining 4% reported to
be Hispanic, Asian or “Other.”

Study |—IVs

While many variables were used in the first study of the correlates of weight bias,
the key factors under examination were related to individual variables and the media
exposure. Television viewing was measured using three self-report items. Children
were asked to list the television shows they watched “yesterday before school,”
“yesterday after school but before dinner,” and “yesterday after dinner but before
bed.” Children were instructed to type the names of television shows they had
watched during those time frames in the previous day. Participants were asked to list
the shows rather than report their time spent viewing because children often struggle
with the recall of time spent viewing. To convert their lists of shows viewed into a
time spent viewing variable, each show listed was assumed to be one-half hour in
length, and an overall index for total time spent viewing per day and per week was
calculated. This is a more conservative measure of television viewing as several of
the shows listed were one-hour programs, but we felt it was important to err on the
conservative side to account for nonviewing time during the hour time frame.

As a measure of self-perception, participants were asked several questions related
to their fears about their own appearance. Items used in this experiment were modeled
after Lundgren, Anderson, and Thompson’s Fear of Negative Appearance Evaluation
(FNAE) scale.!°’ Several statements were rewritten to accommodate participants’
reading level. Furthermore, reliability tests for the full scale were not sufficient, so
items were eliminated from the scale for better reliability. Examples of items included
statements such as “I care about what my friends think of the way I look,” “I worry that

+A more detailed description of the measures used and the study findings can be found in the
following article: K. Bissell and H. Hays, “Understanding Anti-fat Bias in Children: Television
Exposure and Demographic Variables in 3rd-6th Graders’ Implicit and Explicit Attitudes
toward Obesity,” Mass Communication & Society 14, no. 1 (2011): 113-40.
Bissell and Parrott 235

 

other people will not like the way I look,” and “When I meet new people, I wonder
what they will think about the way I look.”

Study 2—Participants

Following the completion of Study 1 with 603 elementary-aged students, several changes
and modifications were made to the instrument and study procedures for Study 2. Of
importance, the media exposure measures were expanded significantly such that we
would have a better sense of exposure to programming viewed in a nontraditional format.
In addition, this study was designed as a within- and between-subjects experiment as data
were collected four times over the course of two years. The goal was to see whether
attitudes toward overweight and obesity changed following an intervention program
implemented at the school. Finally, questions related to household dieting behavior and
peer influence were added along with more extensive measures of attitudes toward eating
and exercise. To examine the relationship between possible predictors of implicit and
explicit attitudes toward weight and obesity, a 2 x 5 factorial design (Gender = Instrument
version, within and between subjects) was used with children in Grades | to 8 ina county
in the South. Participants were 224 boys and girls ranging in age between six and four-
teen. Nearly 13% of the sample was in first grade, 15% was in second grade, 13% was in
third grade, 8% was in fourth grade, 8% was in fifth grade, 16% was in sixth grade, 13%
was in seventh grade, and 14% was in eighth grade. Of the 224 participants, 40% were
boys and 60% were girls with ethnic representation that was closely matched to that of
the county where data were collected: 40% of the sample was Caucasian, 50% was
African American, and the remaining 10% reported to be Hispanic, Asian, or “Other.”

Study 2—IVs

While the same [Vs were used in Studies 1 and 2, we added measures related to poten-
tial social influences on the development of weight bias. These factors related to dis-
cussions about weight and dieting with family members and friends plus household
dieting behavior. Furthermore, we used measures of cognitive processing style so we
could determine whether rational or experiential processing was related to negative
attitudes toward overweight. Several measures served as IVs, including treatment
group, media exposure, the home dieting environment, peer influence, cognitive pro-
cessing styles, and demographic variables. Television viewing was measured using
the same three self-report items as used in Study 1. In addition to time spent viewing
television on a traditional screen, participants were asked about their television view-
ing on an iPod, a computer, or other handheld device using the statement, “Please list
the television shows you watched yesterday on an iPod or computer.” Participants
were instructed to list the shows by name, as they did for the earlier TV viewing items.
A numerical code representing time spent viewing on a handheld device or computer
was then assigned to each child’s self-reported viewing time. Participants were also
asked about their time spent on the computer using the Internet, time spent listening to
music on an iPod or other handheld device, and time spent playing video games on
devices such as the Wi1, Xbox, or handheld gaming devices.
236 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

In Study 2, the researchers created a thin-ideal viewing scale, which was calculated
using participants’ list of television programs viewed most frequently. To calculate the
body type of characters appearing in children’s programming, fifteen coders (not
related to the present project) were recruited to assign a body shape and appearance
code to characters from forty-two television programs. Each coder was shown three
images of individual characters from popular children’s programs. The images showed
the full body of the characters and represented screen grabs from the television pro-
gram. Coders were instructed to assign a 1-7 code for body shape ranging from con-
spicuously thin to conspicuously fat and to assign a 1—7 code for each character’s
overall appearance from very attractive to very unattractive. Using participants’ self-
reported frequency of viewing each show, a multiplicative index was created such that
an assessment of participants’ overall exposure to thin-ideal programming could be
calculated.

While one goal of the Study 2 was to better understand the relationship between
media exposure and weight bias, we recognized that other factors—individual and
social—might also be related to the development or reinforcement of bias. Thus, we
added questions to tap into these types of factors and influences. A series of questions
was developed to measure the dieting behavior observed at home for each participant.
Participants were asked to indicate whether specific family members had ever been on
a diet (mother, father, or a sibling). The responses were nominal with the choice of
“ves,” “no,” or “I don’t know.” “No” answers were assigned a numerical score of 1,
and “yes” answers were assigned a numerical score of 2. Responses of “I don’t know”
were recoded as system missing. Of those responding, 41% indicated that neither par-
ent had been on a diet, 22% indicated that one parent had been on a diet, and 37%
reported that both parents had been on a diet at some point.

Peer influence was measured using eight items designed to identify whether partici-
pants discussed issues such as weight, appearance, body shape, or dieting with friends.
Participants were asked a series of questions related to general conversations about
one of the four topics with a peer or peer group and then asked a series of questions
related to the importance of peer acceptance with regard to their own weight, appear-
ance, body shape, and dieting.

Finally, seventeen items tested participants’ cognitive processing style—rational
or experiential—and these were the same items used in Study 1. Eight statements
captured each child’s preference for experiential processing, while nine statements
measured each child’s degree of rational processing. The first scale was derived
from responses to the REI that measured cognitive predilections toward rational
processing. Items used for this scale were slightly rewritten to make it easier for the
children to comprehend. Items included statements such as “I enjoy problems that
require me to think hard” and “I prefer difficult problems instead of easy problems.”
The second scale was also derived from the REI-A and gauged cognitive predilec-
tions toward intuitive processing. Items included statements such as “I use my gut
instinct when I have to figure out a problem” and “I use my feelings when I[ have to
make a decision.”
Bissell and Parrott 237

 

Study 3—Participants

Studies 3 and 4 were similar in objective but designed to better understand weight bias
in adults. A total of 176 participants ranging in age from nineteen to thirty-four partici-
pated in Study 3. In Study 3, approximately 67% of the sample was female and 33%
of the sample was male. Snowball and convenience samples were used to recruit indi-
viduals involved in weight-loss or dieting programs or fitness-related programs such
as group exercise or personal training. The objective was to identify a sample actively
involved in a diet, health, or exercise program to produce changes to their own body
shape and size. The goal was to identify participants who were either presently over-
weight or obese or who had once been so. The rationale was that if we replicated ear-
lier studies with a sample that might have been the target of weight bias or at least have
some experience with bias against overweight, we would gain greater understanding
of the correlates of bias development. While we had not previously used measures of
in-group/out-group bias, we wanted to better understand how those who might have
been the target of bias would react or respond to other overweight individuals; thus,
the objective of this project was to recruit participants who might have been the recipi-
ent of negative attitudes or negative behavior because of their weight. Participants
were recruited in two ways: local businesses who offered weight-loss services, weight-
loss products, or exercise, and fitness services were asked to place a link to the online
study on their business website. Individuals viewing the company website would see
the link for the study and could opt to participate or not. Local businesses offered a
10% discount on products and services for participation in the study, so participants
were given an incentive to participate in the study. The last item on the survey asked
participants to send the link to other friends or family members who might be willing
to participate. “Referred” friends were also given the 10% incentive from local busi-
nesses. Participants were also recruited from local fitness centers and gyms. In this
case, flyers were placed throughout the exercise and health facilities, and individuals
could pull a tab that provided information on how to participate in the study. These
individuals were also given a 10% discount at the local weight-loss and health services
businesses. The local businesses and fitness centers used for recruiting purposes were
places targeting college students; thus, the age range of this sample was not diverse.
Of the 176 participants, 7% identified as being African American and the remaining
93% identified as being Caucasian.

Study 3—IVs

The [Vs used in the study with adults were very similar to the ones used in Studies |
and 2; however, the measures used for media exposure were expanded, and measures
related to societal pressures associated with being thin were also added. Participants
reported the average number of days per week they spent viewing entertainment tele-
vision, and then were asked to indicate the average amount of time they spent viewing
entertainment television per day. To get a better sense of the content participants were
viewing, each was asked to list up to ten television programs watched with any
238 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

regularity. Participants reported the frequency of viewing each television show listed
on the instrument using the response options of never, rarely, sometimes, often, or
regularly. Participants followed similar procedures for their reading of magazines,
their viewing of television shows on handheld devices or the Internet, and their use of
video games such as Xbox or Wii. From participants’ list of programs viewed on tele-
vision, a handheld device, or on the Internet, a television-viewing index was created.
All entertainment television shows listed were used to compute a single variable rep-
resenting time spent viewing television. If a sports program or news program was
listed, this exposure was not included in the entertainment television-viewing index. A
multiplicative index was created using the number of shows participants reported
viewing times their frequency of viewing that specific show. This enabled us to have
a more precise measure of exposure to entertainment media.

Along with the media exposure measures, participants reported demographic vari-
ables, cognitive processing styles, household dieting behavior, and peer influence as
it related to weight and body shape, as discussed above. We added a series of ques-
tions related to sociocultural pressure to be thin to this study with adults. A total of
twenty items were used for this scale, and items included statements such as “In our
society, overweight people are regarded as attractive,” “People find individuals who
are in shape more attractive than individuals who are not in shape,” and “In today’s
society, it is important to always look attractive.” These items came from a Cusumano
and Thompson study.!°® Response options ranged from “strongly disagree” to
“strongly agree,” and this item was used to gauge what we refer to as ideological
influences on weight bias. The other modification to the present study was a series of
items used to measure participant self-discrepancy—a more precise measure of body
dissatisfaction than the FNAE measure used with children and participant height and
weight. Self-discrepancy was measured using items from the unpublished scale
developed by Cash.!° Participants were asked to respond to two series of questions:
perceptions of an individual’s ideal height, weight, skin complexion, muscle tone and
definition, body proportions, and overall physical appearance and the importance of
each of those attributes. For example, participants responded to the following state-
ment, “My ideal weight is . . .,” using the following response options: exactly as I am,
almost as I am, fairly unlike me, and very unlike me. The second part of the question
was to ask participants about the importance of that attribute: “How important is your
ideal weight?” Response options included not important, somewhat important, mod-
erately important, and very important. These items allowed us to gauge participants’
general discrepancy between actual and ideal self regarding several body shape and
appearance attributes.

Participants’ body mass index (BMI) was calculated using self-report data on
height and weight. While we acknowledge that self-report data in this area may be
questionable in terms of internal validity, the hope was to be able to classify partici-
pants as underweight, average weight, or overweight. Participants were also asked
to classify themselves into those same categories currently and in the last twelve
months.
Bissell and Parrott 239

 

Study 4—Participants

Study 4 also used adult participants, but the goal in recruiting was not to identify a
sample engaged in weight-loss activities specifically. We acknowledge that in any
sample of undergraduate students, a larger percentage of them will have engaged in
such behavior but might not have sought out help at weight-loss facilities or exercise
centers. For the last study, a design similar to Studies 1 and 2 was used. To examine
the relationship between possible predictors of implicit attitudes toward weight and
obesity and the relationship of those implicit attitudes on more explicit attitudes of
bias, a 2 x 5 factorial design (Gender < Instrument version) was used with adults in
two states in the South. A total of 276 participants ranging in age from eighteen to
twenty-four participated in the study. Approximately 67% of the sample was female
and 33% of the sample was male. A convenience sample was employed to recruit the
276 participants. Study 4 participants were recruited through participant pools at two
universities whereas Study 3 participants were mostly college students, but some
attended community colleges or other colleges in the city where the study was
conducted.

Study 4—IVs

All participants answered a series of questions related to media use, food intake, and
involvement in physical activity and exercise. Participants then completed the IAT,
designed to tap into implicit attitudes toward weight bias. Next, participants were
asked a single question designed to be used as a filter variable, which placed partici-
pants into one of four experimental groups or the control group. Once sorted into one
of five groups, participants in the experimental groups viewed one of four images (see
“Stimulus” section) and then answered questions designed to measure explicit atti-
tudes toward weight bias. Participants sorted into the control group did not view an
image but answered similar questions related to weight bias. After completing the first
round of explicit measures of weight bias, all participants returned to the same section
of the online instrument and completed other items related to self-discrepancy, exer-
cise frequency, weight stigmatization, fear of negative appearance evaluations, and
cognitive processing styles. For Study 4, the media exposure measures used in Study
3 were replicated; however, we took participants’ self-reported exposure to media and
created a body shape index for each of the television programs viewed so that a thin-
ideal viewing index could be created. In this case, for each of the television programs
listed, the primary female characters were identified, and screen shots of each charac-
ter were used in a separate study to assess whether participants were exposed to enter-
tainment programming with mostly thin characters, mostly overweight characters, or
with characters having a range of body shapes and sizes. Twenty undergraduate stu-
dents were recruited to aid in the coding of each primary female character’s body
shape, and for each character, a mean body shape code was obtained. Using proce-
dures employed by Bissell!!® and Harrison,!!! each coder used a five-point scale to
240 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

assign a body shape code to all primary female characters. Coders used a 1-5 scale
with a 1 = conspicuously thin, 3 = about average, and 5 = conspicuously fat. This
allowed us to also have a measure of participant exposure to thin-ideal media so that
we could better understand the role of media exposure in the development or rein-
forcement of bias against overweight.

Results

Data from the studies suggest the explication of a theoretical model is necessary to
better understand the multitude of factors related to the development of bias. As out-
lined in the literature reviewed and in the discussion of relevant theories used in the
testing of bias against specific groups, we have identified several factors that all seem
to serve as correlates or precursors in the development of bias. It is difficult to argue
that any one factor whether it be individual, social, media, or ideology “trumps” other
factors as the development of bias seems to be very individualistic. Therefore, we
propose a model that represents the factors identified above. We will discuss the spe-
cific findings of each of the four studies and then summarize what we feel are the most
relevant factors in the larger model examining the development of bias.

Study !—Results

Study | was the first of four empirical investigations examining precursors to weight
bias. In this study, 601 children in Grades 3 to 6 served as the sample, and variables of
importance were individual factors such as demographic factors, fear of negative
appearance evaluations (self-perception), cognitive processing styles, and media
exposure. One basic objective of Study 1 was to assess whether participants exposed
to overweight subjects in the stimulus would have higher levels of AFB when com-
pared with participants who viewed a thin boy or girl in the stimulus. Each of the four
studies used two measures of explicit bias—one was designed to assess attitudes about
the subject viewed in the stimulus photograph and the second was a more global, or
general, measure of weight bias. For this study, statistical tests indicated that partici-
pants who viewed the image of the overweight girl were more likely to assess her
unfavorably than participants who viewed the image of the thin girl. More specifically,
exposure to the overweight girl in the stimulus photograph primed or triggered nega-
tive attitudes toward her. Participants exposed to the image of the overweight girl were
less likely to indicate she was pretty, smart, friendly, and were less likely to say they
would be friends with her.

The second measure of weight bias was a more general assessment of negative
attitudes toward overweight and, again, participants randomly assigned to the “over-
weight” treatment groups in the experiment were more likely to exhibit negative atti-
tudes toward overweight. For this study, the statistical test comparing the differences
between groups indicated that, as predicted, exposure to an overweight subject in a
photograph resulted in more weight bias using the specific and general measures of it.
Bissell and Parrott 241

 

When some of the individual-level variables were considered with the two depen-
dent variables, interesting patterns emerged. For example, higher scores on the FNAE
scale were related to more favorable evaluations of the subjects in the stimulus photo-
graphs, suggesting that those with greater anxiety about their own appearance were
more likely to be less critical of others when the more general measure of weight bias
was considered. However, when experimental group was considered along with the
FNAE scores, a different picture emerged. Participants who had higher appearance
anxiety and who viewed the image of the overweight girl gave her the lowest evalua-
tion scores, followed by participants viewing the image of the overweight boy. This
finding suggests a possible interaction between self-perception (fear of negative
appearance evaluations) and exposure to the stimulus photograph that might trigger
weight bias. When viewing an image that directly represents the appearance partici-
pants were fearful of obtaining, bias became more evident. The individual factors in
Study 1 were important and relevant predictors that helped us form a baseline level of
knowledge regarding the development or reinforcement of bias.

One objective with Study 1 was to better understand the role of television and
younger children’s attitudes about weight. Another prediction of this study was that
greater exposure to entertainment television would be related to higher levels of AFB
based on the assumptions of cultivation theory and how continued exposure to mes-
sages about weight may result in a change in attitudes or a reinforcement of attitudes
about people who are overweight. Results suggest there was an interaction effect
between the experimental condition, time spent viewing, and each dependent variable.
However, greater television viewing was related to the two dependent variables in an
interesting way. More simply, television viewing was related to decreased levels of
AFB (general measure) but more positive appraisals of the subjects in the photographs
(more specific measure). Results from this study suggest than when television viewing
was considered alone, it proved to be a significant predictor of less AFB on a global
level. Thus, it could be interpreted that given the large range of body types found in
popular children’s programming and given the popularity of some larger-than-average-
sized or average-sized characters,'!* that greater exposure to television might only
serve to reinforce more positive attitudes and acceptance of all body types.

As stated above, television viewing alone was a predictor of more negative assess-
ments of subjects in the stimulus photograph, but when television viewing and experi-
mental version were considered with the second dependent variable (stimulus response
scale, assessments of subjects in the photos), a different pattern emerged: participants
who watched the most television and viewed the image of the overweight subjects had
the most favorable assessments of subjects in the photographs, and assessments for the
overweight boy and girl were significantly higher than for the thin boy and girl. These
tests indicate that the experimental version did have an interaction effect when com-
bined with TV viewing. The findings from these two statistical tests suggest the fol-
lowing: when amount of television viewing was considered statistically, the
relationship to AFB was not in the predicted direction. Participants who watched the
most television were more positive in their assessment of the overweight subjects but
242 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

£ | COGNITIVE
% | PROCESSING
i
= .
Experiential .
= xp Sy
z
z
= .
= Rational
Exposure to 4g Favorable
a| overweight girl
5 a
oO rT
= oo s . oS
Q Exposure to thin girl) -42 2 Heavier : Perceptions
£ * exposure to of overweight
3 Exposure to | 36 | = television individuals
= overweight boy s |
2 x SELF- YY
4 | Exposure to thin $ . |
a P ‘ ¢ | PERCEPTION Unfavorable
oy a
= ?
5
= Fear of negative
z appearance
= evaluations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure I. Regression model of the most significant factors in weight bias in 601 children in
Grades 3 to 6 (Study | results).

when the experimental version was factored into the equation statistically, AFB
decreased across viewing groups. So, it appears the experimental version was the
stronger predictor of AFB.

Another individual factor considered in Study | was participant’s cognitive pro-
cessing style. As very little literature exists establishing a relationship between expe-
riential or rationale processing and degree of bias, statistics were run to see what type
of relationship might emerge. Regression analysis indicated that the experiential pro-
cessing system was significantly related to the general and more specific measures of
AFB. For example, participants who were higher on the experiential processing sys-
tem tended to have lower levels of AFB and also tended to have more favorable assess-
ments of the subjects in the photographs across experimental groups. However, the
rational processing system was not significantly related to either measure of AFB (see
Figure 1). As very little empirical data exist linking cognitive processing styles with
implicit or explicit attitudes, we felt data from the present study were a good founda-
tion for future studies. Along these lines, the test of the [AT in Study 1 led to some of
the most important findings from the study.

The IAT has not been used as frequently with adolescents and children; thus, it
was used in an exploratory manner to determine how the 601 children in this sample
might sort the positive and negative adjectives. Descriptive statistics were run on
Bissell and Parrott 243

 

each adjective to determine how participants in this sample assigned the positive and
negative adjectives to the words “thin” and overweight.” Quite consistently, a major-
ity of the sample assigned the positive adjectives to the word “thin” whereas a major-
ity of the sample assigned the negative adjectives to the word “overweight.” A series
of paired t-tests were conducted to determine how responses on the twenty dichoto-
mous variables (ten paired groups) would be related. The paired samples correlations
indicated significant negative correlations for each of the ten pairings, and significant
two-tailed differences were found between all ten groups. While descriptive analysis
limits the ability to ascertain whether all positive adjectives were assigned to “thin”
and all negative adjectives were assigned to “overweight,” the distribution of scores
for each of the twenty items suggests that this may be the case. This clustering around
the mean validates the assumption that a majority of respondents would assign posi-
tive attributes to the “thin” and negative attributes to “overweight.” However, this
same clustering around the mean lowers the predictive value of [AT in the two more
explicit measures of AFB. Although we report that the relationship between the [AT
as a predictor of more explicit attitudes is still largely unknown, the concentration
around the mean for IAT suggests a link to anti-fat attitudes merits further
exploration.

Study 2—Results

The objective of Study 2 was to continue the examination of correlates or predictors of
weight bias; however, some IVs were added, and the media exposure measures were
modified. This study used a completely different sample of children in Grades | to 8
at a gifted and talented school in the South, and as mentioned above, the study included
pretest/posttest data collection along with data collected from a modified version of
the IAT. As the sample in Study 1 was from rural areas around the state and because
participants were largely not identified as gifted and talented, we conducted a pre-test
of the entire instrument to ensure scale validity. When the instrument was pre-tested
in the summer of 2009 with a fourth- and fifth-grade sample, factor analysis was con-
ducted on twenty-eight different adjectives to determine which pairings would be most
appropriate in the modified version of the IAT. Factor analysis confirmed the use of
the eleven pairings in Study 2, and these were the same adjectives plus one used in
Study 1. Descriptive statistics were run on each adjective to determine how partici-
pants in this sample assigned the positive and negative adjectives to the words “thin”
and “overweight.” Again, a majority of this sample assigned the positive adjectives to
the word “thin” whereas a majority of the sample assigned the negative adjectives to
the word “overweight.” A series of paired t-tests were conducted to determine how
responses on the twenty-two dichotomous variables (eleven paired groups) would be
related. The paired samples correlations indicated significant negative correlations for
each of the ten pairings, and significant two-tailed differences were found between all
eleven groups.

A key objective of Study 2 was to test the effectiveness of a media literacy cam-
paign designed to directly address weight bias in children. The study was designed
such that AFB was measured prior to the media literacy program and immediately
244 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

after the intervention program to determine whether attitudes about overweight and
obesity had changed. This was one of the reasons for the within-subjects design. The
first hypothesis for this study predicted that AFB would be higher at the pre-test than
at the post-test. Paired sampled tests were used to compare mean scores on both
measures of explicit bias, and the tests revealed a significant, positive change for both
measures. Results from this statistical test suggest that the issues addressed during the
media literacy program may have resulted in more favorable attitudes about over-
weight and obese individuals but that AFB was high across the sample at the pre-test.
The within-subjects test of AFB demonstrated significant differences between the two
data collection points. However, we also wanted to better understand how exposure to
an image of an overweight boy or girl or thin boy or girl might be related to AFB; thus,
this project also contained a between-subjects test of weight stigmatization.

Statistical tests were run to examine anti-fat attitudes across experimental groups in
the between-subjects portion of the study. When the first dependent measure (specific
measure of weight bias) was compared with the experimental version (overweight
boy/girl or thin boy/girl or no image), one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) tests
indicated that those viewing no image at all (control group) had the lowest level of
AFB. When experimental versions were considered using pretest data, participants
viewing the image of the overweight girl followed by participants viewing the image
of the overweight boy had the highest AFB scores. One-way ANOVA tests indicated
statistically significant differences across the five groups, and the children viewing the
images of the overweight girl exhibited greater AFB. When the posttest measure of
weight bias was examined by experimental group, participants in the control group
had almost the same score at both points. Participants’ scores across the four experi-
mental groups all became more favorable toward the subject viewed, but the most
significant change was found for participants viewing the image of the overweight girl
and boy.

Study 2 also examined possible correlates of AFB in an attempt to better under-
stand how the media literacy campaign could be revised to specifically address the
factors that were found to be stronger predictors of weight bias. One important vari-
able in understanding correlates of AFB was understanding children’s use of and time
spent with the media. Time spent viewing television varied across this sample with the
youngest and oldest participants viewing the least amount of television per day.

When TV viewing was considered along with the two dependent measures, televi-
sion viewing was a significant predictor of greater AFB using the more general mea-
sure of bias. For example, on the more general measure of AFB, those viewing the
most television had the highest AFB scores. Of the sample, twenty-three participants
reported not viewing any television at all. Those participants had the lowest AFB
scores compared with participants who reported watching up to an hour of television,
and compared with those who watched the most television, at least two or more hours
per day. No significant differences in AFB were found when the more specific mea-
sure of bias was examined.

Another goal of the study was to examine television exposure in a slightly differ-
ent way as the age range in this sample was more diverse and we knew programming
Bissell and Parrott 245

 

choices would also be more diverse. Thus, we regrouped viewing into two categories—
animated and live-action programming. For this study, each participant’s self-
reported viewing was recoded into a live-action or animated category as we knew the
specific programs viewed and their self-report frequency of viewing. For example, a
participant could report viewing programs after dinner, and those programs were then
recoded as a live-action or animated program, and this resulted in two separate scores
for each type of programming. Participants’ time spent viewing animated and live-
action programming was what might be expected with a sample that included six- and
seven-year-old children. The younger participants reported spending more time
watching animated shows such as Spongebob Squarepants, Johnny Test, or Scooby
Doo, and the other participants reported spending much more time watching live-
action programming such as iCarly, Hannah Montana, or Drake and Josh. When TV
viewing was considered by gender, the girls in the sample reported watching signifi-
cantly more television than the boys in the sample. Statistically significant differ-
ences were also found for television viewing by ethnicity. For example, white
participants reported watching about seventy-five minutes of television per day com-
pared with black participants who reported watching more than two and a half hours
of television per day. When type of programming was considered with the two depen-
dent measures, one-way ANOVA tests indicated that participants viewing the most
live-action programming had significantly lower scores on the more global measure
of AFB compared with those watching no live-action programming. Time spent
viewing live-action programming was not related to the more specific measure of
weight bias. Exposure to animated programming was significantly related to both
measures of AFB (see Figure 2).

Given the range of findings here, it is difficult to say with much certainty how tele-
vision viewing was directly related to participants’ level of AFB. However, television
viewing when considered alone suggested it was related to the measures of explicit
bias, but possibly not in the way predicted. The findings were more straightforward
when experimental version was considered: participants who viewed images of over-
weight individuals were more likely to think of those individuals in a negative way.

To better understand some of the predictors of AFB in participants, several social
and individual factors were considered with the pre- and posttest measures of AFB. In
addition to examining individual factors such as demographic variables and media
exposure, we also measured what we considered to be social factors such as the home
dieting environment. Household dieting behavior was measured by asking participants
whether a family member was on a diet. It is acknowledged participants might not
know this information and thus were given the option of responding, “I don’t know.”
The nominal responses (yes/no) were then used to create a scale that measured the
entire household’s dieting behavior. One-way ANOVA tests indicate that participants
who had two parents on a diet had higher AFB than participants who had neither par-
ent on a diet. This measure was a more global gauge of participant attitudes toward
overweight individuals in general, whereas the second measure was an attitudinal
measure designed to gauge attitudes about the individual viewed in the photograph.
When this second measure of explicit bias was considered, findings were in the
246 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

& | Self-discrepancy
¢ (girls)
a 8
op
q Experiential |“! 5 22
2 processing $ Children’s eating
E “| attitudes test
2 i 12
| proocesn 36
3 processing
o
Exposure to over) “2 General Favorable
5 weight girl entertainment)
z television |
Exposure to thin girl) -/7 exposure 7
5 ” . | . Perceptions of
& | Exposure to over ——_— © Live-action overweight
# weight boy g | | television |2> individuals
g 4 Race € exposure |.»
a Exposure tothin boy! 13 a . Unfavorable
& * Animated
No image ‘Ss television.
Age a exposure
S
5
a

 

 

 

 

Figure 2. Regression model of the most significant factors in weight bias in 224 children in
Grades | to 8 (Study 2 results).

opposite direction. Participants with two dieters in the family had the most favorable
assessments of subjects in the photograph followed by participants with one dieter in
the household and followed by participants with no dieters in the household. It is
important to note that participants in all four studies might be hesitant or reluctant to
report a bias against overweight individuals, especially if the participant lives with or
comes in contact with overweight individuals. Furthermore, some participants were
asked if an overweight boy or girl/man or woman was attractive, smart, popular, and
so on, and some might find it troublesome to report negative attitudes toward over-
weight individuals. With that in mind, scores on both dependent variables were high
across each of the four samples, suggesting that despite the sensitive nature of the
questions, participants were still exhibiting negative attitudes and opinions about over-
weight individuals.

Another question this study sought to answer was when explicit bias might become
evident in a child. More specifically, at what age would a child identify or indicate a
bias toward overweight individuals? One-way ANOVA tests indicate that younger
participants had the highest levels of AFB on the global measure of weight bias. When
the second measure of bias was considered, similar patterns were observed. For this
Bissell and Parrott 247

 

statistical test, younger participants had less favorable attitudes toward the subject in
the photograph, while those in higher grades had more favorable attitudes toward the
subject in the stimulus photograph. It is quite possible that older participants who read
questions about the subject in the photograph processed the question a little more
rather than quickly going through at a rapid pace.

Participant race was a significant predictor of AFB as well. In the global measure
of AFB, white participants had the highest levels of AFB when compared with black
participants or participants categorized as “Other.” This finding was repeated when
the specific measure of weight bias was considered. One-way ANOVA tests using the
more specific measure of bias as the dependent variable indicated that black partici-
pants had the most favorable assessments of the subjects in the photograph, even
though black subjects were not used in the stimulus photographs. Given that black
participants exhibited lower levels of AFB and the subjects in the stimulus photo-
graphs were white, multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) tests were con-
ducted to assess whether there was an interaction effect between experimental version
and race on the two dependent measures. The results from the MANOVA test parallel
what was found above: white participants exhibited significantly higher levels of
AFB, especially when the subject in the photograph was overweight. When race and
experimental version were considered with the second measure of the dependent vari-
able, the findings were the same with white participants reporting the greatest AFB
compared with black participants and participants in the “Other” group, which com-
prises Hispanic participants (n = 3), Asian participants (7 = 6), and participants mark-
ing “Other” as their ethnic group (7 = 7).

Study 3—Results

While the relationship between media and body image distortion has been examined
empirically for decades, very little evidence exists documenting the relationship
between an individual’s self-perception as it relates to body image and the individual’s
perceptions of others’ body shape and size. Thus, this study examined media as a pre-
dictor of self-discrepancy and self-perception in adults who were dieting or participat-
ing ina fitness program and then examined those constructs with perceptions of others’
body shape and size. It is argued here that beliefs about the self may shape beliefs
about others, especially as it relates to body image. However, this study went beyond
measuring perceptions about body image and examined social factors such as the
household dieting environment and exposure to media as potential covariates of the
relationship. Specifically, this project examined the multidimensional factors related
to an individual’s body image on both ends of the spectrum and further examined how
these variables relate to prejudice or AFB against others.

The first hypothesis in Study 3 was related to participant’s level of self-discrepancy
or self-perception as it pertained to body image and exposure to thin-ideal media
content. Time spent viewing television was varied across the sample with the
youngest viewing the least amount of television per day. Exposure to thin-ideal
programming was linear with age however. More simply, the older the participant,
the more likely it was that he or she was exposed to greater amounts of thin-ideal
248 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

programming. One-way ANOVA tests were used, and for this test, exposure to
thin-ideal programming was recoded into four categories: no exposure to thin-ideal
television, less than an hour of exposure, between one and two hours of exposure,
and more than two hours of exposure. Using the recoded thin-ideal viewing index,
ANOVA tests indicated that participants exposed to the most thin-ideal program-
ming had the greatest discrepancy between their actual and ideal selves, as mea-
sured by the Stunkard scale, and this was the case for men and women in the
sample.

Using a modified version of the Stunkard body image ideals figure drawing scale,
a body shape scale using figure drawings of a male and female was created. The online
instrument contained a filter variable, whereby participants would answer the question
about participant gender and then be directed to view the drawing presented. Male and
female participants were asked to circle the body shape they felt was most similar to
their current body shape, and then using a second figure drawing, participants were
asked to circle what they considered to be their ideal body shape. Participants could
circle any body shape or a number between the body shapes in their assessment of
their actual and ideal body shape. The mean score for male participants’ actual body
size was 3.95 (SD = 0.88) and the mean score for female participants’ actual body size
was 4.17 (SD = 1.13). To create a self-discrepancy score for each participant, the ideal
body shape score was subtracted from the actual body shape score. A negative score
indicated the participant desired to be bigger than his or her actual size. If a participant
desired to be smaller than his or her actual size, the resulting score was positive.

To examine actual/ideal self-relationship statistically, the programming categoriza-
tion was used with each participant’s SD score. For example, female participants who
reported watching the most programming coded as “thin ideal” had a self-discrepancy
score of 0.93 (SD = 0.51), indicating that their ideal body shape was approximately
one body shape smaller than their actual body shape. For male participants, the find-
ings were similar, although the self-discrepancy score was not as great for men as it
was for women.

The second prediction of Study 3 examined participants’ perceptions of others in
relation to exposure to thin-ideal media exposure. The thinking was that if exposure to
thin-ideal programming was high, perceptions of individuals who were overweight
might be more negative. To test this hypothesis, two separate dependent variables
were included—one measuring specific responses to images of the subject viewed in
the stimulus photograph, and a second, more global measure of AFB (this stimulus
was similar to Studies | and 2 except that adult subjects were viewed in place of child
subjects). Statistical tests that those viewing the most television and those viewing the
most thin-ideal television had the most negative attitudes toward overweight individu-
als and this was when the more specific and general measures of weight bias were
considered.

For this study, participants were asked to list any programs they viewed on televi-
sion, on an iPod, an iPad, and so on, and then participants were instructed to report
their frequency of viewing each individual program. When examining the television
programs listed across the sample, younger participants were more likely to list
Bissell and Parrott 249

 

programming such as Pretty Little Liars, The Bachelor, The Secret Life of the American
Teenager, and Beverly Hills, 90210. Older participants listed programming such as
NCIS, NCIS Los Angeles, CSI, and The Mentalist.

The relationship between television viewing, experimental group, and weight bias
was examined using a MANOVA test, which included the experimental version and
television exposure as IVs. As television exposure was a predictor of greater AFB, it
was determined identifying the combination of factors via an interaction effect would
prove useful. When television viewing was considered with experimental version
using the global measure of AFB, those viewing the most amount of television and
who were exposed to the image of the overweight women had the highest AFB scores.
For the global measure of AFB, television viewing appeared to play less of a role in
predicting AFB than did exposure to the image in the stimulus photograph. While the
MANOVA test indicated a significant main effect and a significant interaction effect,
evidence of weight bias was not as high across experimental groups when the more
global measure of weight bias was considered.

Two research questions in Study 3 examined possible predictors of self-discrep-
ancy and AFB in others in the context of individual and social factors. The first
research question examined the relationship of a participant’s household dieting
behavior with perceptions of self and perceptions of others. When dieting behavior
was compared with self-perceptions related to body image, a significant relationship
emerged. Specifically, when an individual indicated two dieters were in the house-
hold, self-discrepancy for women was higher than it was when no dieters were in the
household, and SD scores were the highest for participants who indicated having two
dieters in the home. The finding suggests that when the participant observed dieting
behavior in the home, that individual was more likely to indicate a dissatisfaction with
his or her own body shape and was more likely to engage in dieting behavior himself
or herself. Regression analysis was run to test the relationship among the key variables
in question—thin-ideal television exposure, demographic variables, and household
dieting behavior, and as the analysis indicated, each proved to be a significant predic-
tor of increased self-discrepancy in girls, and when the variables were considered
together, thin-ideal television viewing was the strongest predictor of the three (see
Figure 3).

While observed dieting behavior in the household did appear to be related to self-
perceptions in a negative way, the variable was related to perceptions of overweight
individuals in a positive way. Specifically, participants who indicated one or more
dieters were in their households were more likely to express favorable attitudes
toward overweight individuals, and this was found on both measures of AFB. For
example, participants with two dieters in the household had more favorable in their
assessment of overweight individuals in general when compared with individuals
with no dieter in the household. This pattern was observed when the second measure
of AFB was considered—the more specific measure of weight bias. Individuals with
dieters in the household were more favorable in their estimates of overweight sub-
jects in the stimulus photograph compared with those who had no dieters in the
households.
250 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
   
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘Currently or|.33
5 previously
a on a diet
a A4
cal
| Never ona
z diet
Exposure to |-f> | Highbeliefin | | 2
overweight sociocultural |“ T Favorable
g g pressures to be
5 woman g ° al \ .
g g S| Positive | %
oo . = 4 . ,
3 Exposure to thin! = welt 3 bP ly imag  [Percoptions of
woman Low belief in ~ 5 ”
5 E sociocultural High | & | overweight
=] om 2 | pressures to be an | Xposure to S| Negative individuals
B | baposmeto 15 | thin 2 thin-ideal [29 || toa
i o 29 body
& overweight man 2 3 mu body |
z] television image
‘ j = 40 Unfavorable
Exposure to thin| 4 Low :
_ S| exposure | -19
to thin-ideal
television

 

 

 

 

Figure 3. Regression model of the most significant factors in weight bias in | 76 adults either
currently dieting or previously dieting (Study 3 results).

The second research question examined individual factors such as each individual’s
own dieting behavior and self-discrepancy as possible predictors of AFB. In this case,
the two variables were related to weight bias in different ways, despite the two vari-
ables seemingly being related to one another. It might seem logical that if an individ-
ual had greater discrepancy between his or her actual self and his or her ideal self that
dieting behavior might be one step taken to reduce that discrepancy. These two vari-
ables were not correlated statistically, however; furthermore, this relationship was dif-
ferent for the men and women in the sample. As mentioned above, observation of
household dieting was a predictor of decreased bias against overweight individuals,
and this was found in men and women. Individuals who reported being on a diet or
previously being on a diet were more critical of overweight in the general and more
specific measures than those who had reported never being on a diet. In this case, a
one-way ANOVA test was run to examine each participant’s dieting behavior (not
currently dieting/never have been on a diet, not currently dieting/previously have been
on a diet, or presently dieting/previously have been on a diet). When both dependent
measures were considered, those currently or previously on a diet had significantly
higher levels of bias against overweight; however, when this variable was considered
using a factorial ANOVA, results indicated that the interaction of dieting behavior and
self-discrepancy resulted in less bias toward overweight. More specifically, for this
adult sample, greater self-discrepancy was a significant and strong predictor of lower
levels of bias using the general and more specific measures of weight bias. When
Bissell and Parrott 251

 

self-discrepancy was considered with dieting behavior, bias against overweight was
still less for those with higher scores on the self-discrepancy scale. Results from addi-
tional tests indicate that the complex relationship between perceptions of self and per-
ceptions of others was moderated by gender. For example, males who had a higher
level of self-discrepancy were more likely to exhibit greater AFB, and girls who were
higher on the self-discrepancy scale were less likely to exhibit AFB. These findings
will be addressed further in the “Discussion” section as they warrant more investiga-
tion into self-perception and the ways in which self-perception shapes perceptions of
others.

Study 4—Results

Study 4 was a between-subjects experiment using the same two measures of weight
bias. Given what was learned in the preceding studies, Study 4 was modified to include
additional measures of media exposure, exercise behavior, and cognitive processing
styles. In all four studies, a version of the [AT was administered, and findings were
consistent with negative adjectives being paired with the words overweight or fat, and
positive adjectives being paired with the word thin. For Study 4, descriptive statistics
were run on each adjective to determine how participants in this sample assigned the
positive and negative adjectives to the words “thin” and “fat.” Quite consistently, a
majority of the sample assigned the positive adjectives to the word “thin” whereas a
majority of the sample assigned the negative adjectives to the word “fat.” A series of
paired t-tests were conducted to determine how responses on the twenty dichotomous
variables (ten paired groups) would be related. Paired-samples correlations indicated
significant negative correlations for each of the ten pairings, and significant two-tailed
differences were found between all ten groups.

In this study, the first hypothesis examined the differences between experimental
groups on participants’ explicit attitudes toward the adult in the stimulus photograph
(overweight man/woman or thin man/woman). A one-way ANOVA test was run using
the instrument version as the grouping variable and using the two explicit measures of
bias. Participants who viewed the image of the overweight woman had significantly
less favorable attitudes toward the subject than did those viewing the image of the thin
woman. This was found across racial and ethnic groups. In previous studies, bias
against overweight females was greater than bias against males; however, in Study 4,
these findings were reversed as evaluations of the overweight and thin man were even
greater in discrepancy, meaning there was a much greater gap in assessments toward
the same overweight and thin man.

Analysis was also conducted on a second measure of explicit bias, the more global
measure of weight bias. One-way ANOVA tests indicated significant differences
between the experimental groups. As expected, participants in the control group
exhibited greater AFB than those exposed to the image of the thin man or woman. Post
hoc Tukey’s tests indicated significant differences between the experimental groups
viewing images of thin and overweight individuals and the control group and partici-
pants in the thin experimental groups. Thus, we found that simple exposure to over-
weight individuals primed individuals to think more negatively about overweight.
252 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No dieters in 3

e household =|"

a

zg

4

@ | One or more

General = | dieters in
re)
Exposure to 7 entertainment |.39 a household 29 Favorable
g | overweight woman F | televisi
g z levision
g Exposure to thin | cxposure 24 .
> woman £ Perceptions of
q s High exposure] .g, loverweight indi-
Exposure to Z| to thin-ideal % cS viduals
5 : =| television
5. overweight man «| Positive body an
Li 2 image Unfavorabl
a Exposure to thin ta thin ideal, » % eee |
man wos a
television é oe
i | Negative body
a image

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4. Regression model of the most significant factors in weight bias in 276 adults either
currently dieting or previously dieting (Study 4 results).

The second prediction of this study was related to television exposure and weight
bias, with the specific prediction that exposure to thin-ideal programming would be
related to greater weight bias, as was found in earlier studies. Results from a MANOVA
test examining the relationship of television exposure and experimental version on the
two measures of explicit bias suggest there was an interaction effect between the two
predictors and each dependent variable. In both cases, greater television viewing was
related to higher levels of AFB, and when the experimental version was considered,
participants exposed to the image of the overweight man and woman had even higher
AFB than those who were exposed to the image of thin man or woman.

When television viewing was grouped into low, medium, and high categories, those
viewing the most television had higher anti-fat attitude scores compared with those in
the low viewing group. Results were similar when comparing television viewing with
experimental version with the more specific measure of bias. Participants who reported
viewing no television had the lowest scores on this specific measure of bias compared
with those who reported viewing the most television (see Figure 4).

In addition to examining the role of television exposure and exposure to thin-ideal
media in general, we also wanted to better understand the role of cognitive processing
styles and the development or existence of bias against overweight, as had been done
in earlier studies. Thus, the first research question examined the predictive power of
the two cognitive measures and AFB. When the two cognitive processing styles were
Bissell and Parrott 253

 

considered together in a regression test, rational processing was a strong, negative
predictor of the global measure of anti-fat attitudes whereas experiential processing
was a significant, positive predictor of anti-fat attitudes. This means that those higher
in rational processing exhibited less AFB than those who were higher in experiential
processing. The experiential and rational processing scales could certainly serve as
one predictor of AFB, but it is important to know that personality traits and character-
istics such as thoughtfulness were not measured, and thus, the above finding could
also be a product of an individual’s likelihood to not buy into baseless stereotypes and
might judge a person by more than mere appearance.

The second research question of Study 4 examined the relationship between the
IAT and other variables that might serve as predictors of weight bias. Initial tests of
the variables related to the [AT indicated that both measures of AFB were related, as
was the experiential processing scale and entertainment television viewing. The [AT
was first examined with the two measures of AFB. It was presumed that if an indi-
vidual tended to link negative adjectives to the word “fat” and positive adjectives to
the word “thin,” that individual could be classified as exhibiting implicit weight bias.
The IAT scale was then recoded so that individuals who were more likely to assign
several types of adjectives to the word fat were assigned one code whereas participants
who were more likely to link adjectives to the word thin received another code.
Participants with a score in the middle of the scale were assigned a separate code.
Participants who were more likely to indicate a fat person could be smart, funny, or
valuable had a lower score on the global measure of AFB. Participants who were more
likely to say only thin people could be smart, pretty, athletic, and valuable had a higher
score on the AFB scale. This finding was similar when the more specific measure of
weight bias was considered. Participants who were likely to associate positive adjec-
tives with the word fat were also much more charitable in their assessments of subjects
in the photographs, whereas the opposite was true for participants linking positive
adjectives to the word thin. Regression tests and one-way ANOVA tests confirm sta-
tistically significant findings in all cases.

The IAT was also significantly related to the experiential processing scale. In this
case, participants who scored in the middle of the [AT—those who paired an equal
number of negative adjectives to the word fat and positive adjectives to the word
thin—had the highest scores on the AFB scale compared with their counterparts on
the other two sides of the scale. Rational processing was not statistically related to
the IAT.

All-inclusive multiple regression was used to combine four predictor variables—
television viewing, IAT, and the two cognitive scales. Taken together, the four vari-
ables were statistically significant predictors of AFB. Further analysis revealed that
from those four variables, the second cognitive scale measuring experiential pro-
cessing and IAT were statistically significant predictors of AFB in the presence of
the remaining two variables. The all-inclusive model explained 18% of the variance
in AFB.

When considering the results of the IAT, it is important to note that while descrip-
tive analysis limits the ability to ascertain whether all positive adjectives were assigned
to “thin,” and all negative adjectives were assigned to “overweight,” the distribution
254 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

of scores for each of the twenty items suggests that this may be the case. This cluster-
ing around the mean validates the assumption that a majority of respondents would
assign positive attributes to the “thin” and negative attributes to “overweight.”
Although we report that the relationship between the IAT as a predictor of more
explicit attitudes is still largely unknown, the concentration around the mean for [AT
suggests that a link to anti-fat attitudes merits further exploration.

Finally, Study 4 examined what was considered to be an ideological influence on
bias development—sociocultural attitudes toward body shape. In this case, partici-
pants were asked several questions related to the perceived pressure in society to con-
form to norms related to thinness. A higher score on this scale would mean the
participant felt great societal pressure to be thin and also linked thinness with success
in a variety of environments. In this test of perceived ideological influence and weight
bias, statistical analyses revealed that the higher an individual scored on the sociocul-
tural attitudes scale, the more likely the individual was to exhibit bias against over-
weight. This finding was consistent when both dependent measures were examined.

Summary of Results from Four Studies

Findings from all four studies suggest that the correlates of anti-fat attitudes may lie in
a myriad of factors ranging from individual factors, social factors, ideology or cultural
norms, and media exposure. While the findings across the four studies were not com-
pletely consistent with regard to the stronger predictors of bias, a few of the factors
under investigation were significant across the four studies. Of importance is the
media exposure factor. Whether considered via time spent with the media or consid-
ered by exposure to specific content (thin-ideal content, animated vs. live-action pro-
gramming), time spent viewing entertainment television was a significant predictor of
negative attitudes toward overweight. This was found in four separate studies with
four separate and unique samples. The social environment that included household
dieting behavior and self-perception as it relates to body image was also a strong pre-
dictor of increased or decreased levels of bias in three of the four studies (not exam-
ined in Study 1). Thus, the following model is advanced to help better explain the
development and formation of bias against others, and we propose that the following
model could be used to better understand the development of bias in a variety of areas
beyond weight: bias against gender, ethnicity, age, sexual orientation, and mental
illness.

Discussion

Prejudice development appears to be highly individualistic, limiting the number of
generalizations that may be made about the topic. However, the model presented here
advances several, which should help inform future communications-based research
into prejudice formation. First, stereotypes are prevalent in American media content.
Second, stereotypical media content informs prejudice by (1) making concepts and
associations more readily accessible in memory, (2) cultivating inaccurate perceptions
Bissell and Parrott 255

 

of social groups in the real world, and (3) providing examples by which audience
members may learn what behaviors and opinions are socially acceptable. Third, the
role of the media in the formation of prejudice is mediated and/or moderated by indi-
vidual, environmental, and ideological characteristics of the audience. Stereotypical
media content is most powerful when people lack individual, environmental, or ideo-
logical information concerning the target of prejudice. Most often, people already hold
attitudes toward the target that appears in media content. In these instances, the media
hold less power in the formation of people’s attitudes based on social group member-
ship. The key question concerns the power of the media in relation to additional
sources of influence, including individual, environmental, and ideological factors. The
research outlined here addresses each, and reinforces the idea that media content
should not be investigated in isolation. Rather, scholars who are interested in the role
of the media in prejudice should conduct holistic investigations that account for the
intervening role of individual, ideological, and environmental variables. A holistic
approach 1s especially important for people interested in reducing prejudice. By under-
standing the factors involved in its formation, interventions may more effectively tar-
get prejudice by addressing its individual components. Based on the research presented
here, individual influences involve demographic characteristics, such as race and age,
and cognitive processing characteristics. Environmental factors include home envi-
ronments, especially the role of family and friends. These additional influences may
mitigate or reinforce the power of the media in prejudice, as demonstrated in the
“Results” section. The results presented here reinforce the fact that the media nurture
negative attitudes toward people who are overweight, and influence people’s percep-
tions of their own body weight. The four experiments extend previous research by
underscoring the significant influence of environmental, ideological, and individual
factors in AFB. Certainly, time spent viewing entertainment television significantly
predicted negative attitudes toward overweight. On an individual level, cognitive pro-
cessing style, age, and race emerged as significant factors in the development of
weight-based prejudice. Participants higher in rational processing exhibited less AFB
than those who were higher in experiential processing. Furthermore, people who held
greater anxiety about their own appearance were less likely to be critical of weight on
more general measures. While the data do not explain the reason age-based differences
emerged, the explanation may lay in the fact that children develop cognitively and
socially as they age. Race-based differences likely reflect cultural influences. Children
learn through personal experience and the influence of friends, family, and media.
Indeed, the results presented here suggest that factors such as a child’s home environ-
ment may influence weight-based prejudice, as children who had two parents on a diet
had higher AFB than participants who had neither parent on a diet. Children learn
prejudicial attitudes toward the self and others through the example of adults. Bottom
line is that a number of factors influence our attitudes toward other people. Indeed,
thin-ideal television exposure, demographic variables, and household dieting behavior
each proved to be a significant predictor of increased self-discrepancy in girls, and
when the variables were considered together, thin-ideal television viewing was the
strongest predictor of the three.
256 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Z Home
DEMOGRAPH- 3 environment
x
IC VARIABLES] S :
Gender ‘sg | peer influnce
>]
‘asic Lo z “real-world” Exposure to
& | Race/ethnicity i £ Jentertainment
2 Sexual experience & ‘ainn
& ; 3 media, time
= renee “ spent with Development of,
5 = dia. : :
g i = media, bias or stigma
= Personality 3 homogeny of
3 media content|
~ COGNITIVE Cultural norms
PROCESSING gs /
Experiential 3 | Dominant
& cultural beliefs
=
and
acceptances

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5. Proposed theoretical model for factors influencing the development of bias.

Data from the above studies suggest the explication of a theoretical model is neces-
sary to better understand the myriad of factors related to the development of bias or
negative attitudes against a variety of groups, character traits, or attributes found in
others. As outlined in the literature reviewed and the discussion of relevant theories
used in the testing of bias against specific groups, we have identified several factors
that all seem to serve as correlates or precursors in the development of bias. It is dif-
ficult to argue that any one factor whether it be individual, social, media, or ideology
“trumps” other factors as the development of bias seems to be very individualistic.
Therefore, we propose a model that represents the myriad of factors identified above.
Numerous studies document the existence of bias: bias against gender, bias against
race, bias against sexual orientation, bias against age, bias against mental illness, and
bias against body shape or weight. It is important to note, though, that an individual
who has bias against overweight individuals may not demonstrate the same level of
bias against individuals of another race or ethnicity or against individuals with a men-
tal illness. These factors make the development of a model all the more complex, as
bias or negative attitudes toward others may certainly be predicated or driven by very
specific factors. As outlined below, we will propose a model that incorporates all of
the necessary levels of influence in the development of bias and then propose avenues
for empirical investigation. Thus, we advanced the proposed model, “A Theory of
Influence of Bias Development” (TIBD; see Figure 5).

Individual Influences

In some cases, individual factors would likely be the most powerful in the develop-
ment of bias against others. For example, in the two studies conducted with adults in
Bissell and Parrott 257

 

the measurement of AFB, participants’ own weight and body shape seemed to be a
strong predictor of their attitudes toward others. Overweight individuals were more
likely to be compassionate, or at least less critical, of overweight others whereas the
individuals identifying themselves as underweight or thin were the most likely to be
critical of overweight and obesity. The notion of in-group/out-group bias was also
evidenced in the studies previously: when it comes to individual attitudes about others,
preference often leans in the direction of similar others rather than others who appear
different, and that has been documented in studies of gender, ethnicity, sexual orienta-
tion, and age. Shoemaker and Reese addressed influences on news content specific to
five levels of influence, and individual factors were one of those identified levels.!'3
Even though the present study is not examining factors that shape the development of
news content, we would argue that similar factors could be relevant in the develop-
ment of attitudes and beliefs about others. As Shoemaker and Reese suggest, some-
times it is difficult to separate who you are as an individual (with respect to demographic
factors, etc.) with what you believe because it is those intrinsic characteristics that will
shape and mold your thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and attitudes.

As it relates to specific outcomes of bias beyond demographic characteristics, age
and gender have been found to be related to negative attitudes about others as it relates
to weight and mental illness. In the AFB studies conducted with children, younger
children were more likely to assign negative personality traits to overweight individu-
als compared with older children in the same sample, and boys were more likely to be
charitable in their assessment of overweight individuals than were girls. As evidenced
in all four studies, cognitive processing styles were also strong predictors of bias
against overweight individuals. These types of cognitive processing styles suggest a
good deal about the way an individual deals with all kinds of information, whether it
be real-world information or information received from a media channel. Certainly,
cognitive processing styles might function interactively with an individual’s self-
perception. It is in this way that findings from this study also contribute to the body of
work in the area of CEST. Epstein suggests that when an individual responds to an
emotionally significant event, the experiential system automatically searches for
related events that might influence the course of further processing and of behavioral
tendencies.!'4 Thereby, if an individual witnesses or is exposed to the stigmatization
of overweight or obese individuals either in a mediated context or social context, the
affective response to that event might then activate schema that resonates with that
experience, possibly reinforcing the positive or negative attitudes associated with the
person or object in question. As its name suggests, the experiential system is a system
that learns from experience. Thus, weight bias or weight stigmatization experienced
by an individual or witnessed by an individual may serve to reinforce attitudes and
beliefs about similar others. This would be especially true if the individual were over-
weight himself or herself and had been the target of negative affect because of weight.
This could also be one of the reasons the findings from the modified IAT were consis-
tent across the four studies.

Results from studies using the IAT suggest a good bit about the way information
may be processed and transmitted on an implicit level. The descriptive results on the
IAT from all four studies cited above reveal some of the most telling findings. While
258 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

certain [Vs proved better predictors of more explicit measures of bias, children and
adults in all four samples across gender, ethnicity, and age displayed a propensity to
associate more positive personality and physical attributes with thin people, and more
negative personality and physical attributes to overweight people. If implicit measures
of bias are identified in children as young as seven and eight, it suggests that the atti-
tudes and beliefs will become further entrenched as the child ages, creating a belief
system about others that could result in stigmatization, marginalization, and discrimi-
nation. The implicit measures of bias have been documented in all of the areas pro-
posed by the model—gender, race, sexual orientation, and age. It is possible that a
combination of these individual factors interacts with one another to create a belief
system that reflects negative attitudes and beliefs about others.

We therefore propose individual factors as one of many that may serve as a corre-
late or precursor to bias. Certainly, when examining an individual’s bias toward a
specific group, characteristic, or attribute, the individual factors are most likely to
remain stable; thus, those factors may prove to be more influential when bias or the
development of bias is examined longitudinally.

Social Influences

The social factors encompassed by the proposed model include influences from what
is called the “home environment,” influences from peers and other social groups, and
an individual’s level of experience with the “real world.” If an individual were to be
raised in a home where the mother has a more traditional role in terms of household
duties, work outside of the home, discipline, and so on, that individual’s belief system
about gender may be shaped by that experience. This type of finding has been evi-
denced in studies where young children are asked to articulate opinions or attitudes
about women wearing mechanics clothing or wearing athletic gear that is traditionally
considered appropriate only for men. The home environment could also prove influen-
tial in the development or presence of bias if attitudes by others in the household are
negative. For example, a child who grows up in a home with a parent or sibling who
expresses racist attitudes might also tend to share a similar belief system until more
real-world experience affords the individual another perspective. Peers can serve as a
source of influence in a similar way. While the home environment and peer influence
may prove to be more influential for children with less real-world experience, these
factors do shape an individual’s view of the world. For example, without first-person
experience to suggest that people with mental illness are not violent or individuals
who are overweight are not bad, an individual may rely on his or her social network to
develop beliefs about other people. Specific to issues such as weight bias, an individ-
ual who is exposed to discussions about fat being bad or a child who grows up in a
household where a parent or sibling is constantly dieting may get the message that
overweight or obesity is not desirable and may develop a bias against that characteris-
tic. We would purport that it is in the combination of individual and social factors that
interact with one another to help shape, guide, or develop an individual’s belief system
about others.
Bissell and Parrott 259

 

Ideological Influences

Just as individual and social factors may shape an individual’s beliefs or attitudes, we
would also argue that ideology or cultural norms can serve as another important factor
in the development and/or sustainability of bias. Shoemaker and Reese define ideol-
ogy as “a symbolic mechanism that serves as a cohesive and integrating force in soci-
ety” (p. 221).!!5 Numerous examples can be used to demonstrate how ideology can
potentially shape the way an individual sees the world and subsequently those in it,
although this level of influence is arguably the most difficult to quantify. For example,
there might be a circumstance in which cultural ideology—say institutionalized rac-
ism in the 1950s American South—could trump individual factors when it comes to
bias. It could be argued that this sense of cultural ideology with regard to race shaped
many of our attitudes about African Americans simply because it reflected the domi-
nant way of thinking or, in some cases, the other way of thinking. As was noted
throughout history, this acceptance of a bias against a specific ethnic/racial group was
embraced by the majority because it was what was known and very few counterargu-
ments were presented. Those who were the target of the bias or the negative attitudes
might not have shared this dominant belief about racism, but the attitude was one that
pervaded culture and society on a broader level and thus represented a way of think-
ing. A similar example can be seen with the issue of mental illness. Except for those
who have a mental illness or who have personal experience with someone else with a
mental illness, the dominant, cultural belief may be one that is negative. We would
propose that ideology may shape an individual’s attitudes or beliefs about others, but
that factors such as the social or individual factors could serve as a means of trumping
the dominant cultural belief or cultural norm. Bias, as conceptually defined earlier,
reflects a combination of implicit and explicit attitudes. One might continue to hold
negative implicit associations without knowing it, but that individual would be hesi-
tant, or more willing, to express bias based on input from the dominant cultural ideol-
ogy. While ideological bias is again difficult to quantify and operationalize, we would
argue that it is a relevant factor of influence in the development of bias.

Media Influences

Media are certainly part of our social world, but we feel it is important to identify
media influences separately because the influence of the media is largely predicated
on the factors mentioned above. Mediated representations of gender, race, age, sexual
orientation, weight, mental illness, or any other characteristic may dramatically influ-
ence the way we think about individuals within that group, and even how we think
about ourselves. Numerous studies cited above have documented the importance of
media portrayals in the development of a belief system about gender, race, class, and
age. The influence of the media may be particularly strong when an individual has
little or no contact with a stigmatized group. With no individual experience, social
feedback, or ideological guidance, an individual may rely more heavily on the media
for information about another person, group, or issue. Furthermore, if an individual
260 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

spends a substantial amount of time with media content that offers limited perspec-
tives, he or she could be inclined to adopt the belief system presented via the media.
While this line of thinking is the basis upon which cultivation theory was developed,
we would argue that some of the main premises of this theory still hold true today.

In the four studies discussed above, different theories were used to examine one of
the many factors we propose facilitate or aid in the development of bias or prejudice.
When we examined individual factors such as cognitive process styles and the [AT,
cognitive-experiential self-theory guided our predictions. When we examined other
individual factors such as the home dieting behavior, social learning and social cogni-
tive theory guided our predictions. When we examined factors such as media influence,
cultivation theory guided those predictions. While each theory was appropriate in the
test for one level of influence, none accounted for the multitude of possible factors in
combination. We therefore argue that the proposed model fill previous gaps by looking
at these variables as combined factors of influence. It is possible that mediated repre-
sentations of thin or overweight in combination with household dieting behavior and
self-perception function together to predict greater (or lesser) prejudice in others. As
was noted from some of the studies, when the between-subjects test was examined
statistically, we found with great consistency that exposure to overweight subjects was
related to greater bias. This suggests the image might have primed respondents to think
negatively about weight when looking at an overweight individual.

Conclusion

As mentioned above, our proposed model does not predict a direct order of influence:
we are not suggesting that one level of influence is more powerful or influential than
others as we would argue that the development of bias is very individualized. Situations
might arise in which social influences outweigh individual influences. For example,
with AFB, people who are overweight show no in-group preference, and people with
mental illness might internalize “real-world experience” or negative media content so
much so that it trumps their individual factors. In other cases, individuals who are
rational processors, who exhibit the traits of independent thinkers on personality
scales, and who may have a vast array of real-world experience may not be at all influ-
enced by a cultural ideology or mediated content that presents groups, individuals, or
characteristics in a negative light. Again, the process is too complex to predict a direc-
tion, but we believe the identification of these levels allows for the operationalization
of these influences in future empirical studies. Many of the earlier studies measured
one level of influence—demographic factors or media exposure—but failed to control
for the others suggested by the proposed model. We feel that our theoretical model
takes into account all four types of influence of bias development and would therefore
allow for a more comprehensive examination of weight bias or bias against other types
of attributes. While the proposed model does take into account a variety of factors that
could be related to the development of bias or prejudice, we recognize that measuring
and statistically controlling for all of the possible variables is impractical in our social
scientific environment. However, the proposed model considers variables that can be
measured to help explain bias development and the development of prejudice in
Bissell and Parrott 261

 

children and adults. As bias against so many characteristics and personality traits is
existent and prevalent, it is important to try to understand the precursors of those nega-
tive attitudes. This theoretical model is an attempt to do just that via an examination of
individual, social, media, and ideological factors. Future studies using this model will
be more comprehensive to date and will aid researchers in understanding one of the
many societal problems facing today.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.

Funding

The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.

Notes

1. Francis Dalisay and Alexis Tan, “Assimilation and Contrast Effects in the Priming of Asian
American and African American Stereotypes through TV Exposure,” Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly 86, no. 1 (2009): 7-22; Travis L. Dixon and Keith B. Maddox,
“Skin Tone, Crime News, and Social Reality Judgments: Priming the Stereotype of the
Dark and Dangerous Black Criminal,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 35, no. 8
(2005): 1555-70; Sonja M. Brown Givens and Jennifer L. Monahan, “Priming Mammies,
Jezebels, and Other Controlling Images: An Examination of the Influence of Mediated
Stereotypes on Perceptions of an African American Woman,” Media Psychology 7, no.
1 (2005): 87-106; Christine Hall Hansen, “Priming Sex-Role Stereotypic Event Schemas
with Rock Music Videos: Effects on Impression Favorability, Trait Inferences, and Recall
of a Subsequent Male-Female Interaction,” Basic and Applied Social Psychology 10, no.
4 (1989): 371-91; Christine H. Hansen and Ranald D. Hansen, “How Rock Music Videos
Can Change What Is Seen When Boy Meets Girl: Priming Stereotypic Appraisal of Social
Interactions,” Sex Roles 19, no. 5 (1988): 287-316.

2. Rick W. Busselle, “Television Exposure, Perceived Realism, and Exemplar Accessibility
in the Social Judgment Process,” Media Psychology 3, no. 1 (2001): 43-67; George
Gerbner et al., “Growing Up with Television: The Cultivation Perspective,” in Media
Effects: Advances in Theory and Research (2nd ed.), ed. Jennings Bryant and Dolf
Zillmann (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2002), 43-68; Ki-Young Lee and Sung-
Hee Joo, “The Portrayal of Asian Americans in Mainstream Magazine Ads: An Update,”
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 82, no. 3 (2005): 654-71; Dana Mastro,
Elizabeth Behm-Morawitz, and Michelle Ortiz, “The Cultivation of Social Perceptions of
Latinos: A Mental Models Approach,” Media Psychology 9, no. 2 (2007): 347-65; Dana E.
Mastro and Elizabeth Behm-Morawitz, “Latino Representation on Primetime Television,”
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 82, no. 1 (2005): 110-30; Dana E. Mastro
and Bradley S. Greenberg, “The Portrayal of Racial Minorities on Prime Time Television,”
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 44, no. 4 (2000): 690-703; Adrienne Holz
Ivory, Rhonda Gibson, and James D. Ivory, “Gendered Relationships on Television:
Portrayals of Same-Sex and Heterosexual Couples,” Mass Communication and Society 12,
no. 2 (2009): 170-92.
262 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

3. James Devitt, “Framing Gender on the Campaign Trail: Female Gubernatorial Candidates
and the Press,” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 79, no. 2 (2002): 445-63;
Carol M. Liebler, Joseph Schwartz, and Todd Harper, “Queer Tales of Morality: The
Press, Same-Sex Marriage, and Hegemonic Framing,” Journal of Communication 59, no.
4 (2009): 653-75; Sung-Yeon Park, Kyle J. Holody, and Xiaoqun Zhang, “Race in Media
Coverage of School Shootings: A Parallel Application of Framing Theory and Attribute
Agenda Setting,” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 89, no. 3 (2012): 475-94;
Elaine Sieff, “Media Frames of Mental Illnesses: The Potential Impact of Negative
Frames,” Journal of Mental Health 12, no. 3 (2003): 259-69.

4. Elizabeth Behm-Morawitz and Dana E. Mastro, “Mean Girls? The Influence of Gender
Portrayals in Teen Movies on Emerging Adults’ Gender-Based Attitudes and Beliefs,”
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 85, no. 1 (2008): 131-46; Silvia Knobloch-
Westerwick, Osei Appiah, and Scott Alter, “News Selection Patterns as a Function of
Race: The Discerning Minority and the Indiscriminating Majority,” Media Psychology
11, no. 3 (2008): 400-17; Michelle Ortiz and Jake Harwood, “A Social Cognitive Theory
Approach to the Effects of Mediated Intergroup Contact on Intergroup Attitudes,” Journal
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 51, no. 4 (2007): 615-31; Albert Bandura, “Social
Cognitive Theory of Mass Communication,” in Media Effects: Advances in Theory and
Research (3rd ed.), ed. Jennings Bryant and Mary Beth Oliver (New York: Routledge,
2009), 94-124.

5. Nancy Signorielli, “Aging on Television: Messages Relating to Gender, Race, and
Occupation in Prime Time,” Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 48, no. 2
(2004): 279-301; Nancy Signorielli, “Aging on Television: The Picture in the Nineties,”
Generations 25, no. 3 (2001): 34-38.

6. Melinda C. R. Burgess et al., “Playing with Prejudice: The Prevalence and Consequences
of Racial Stereotypes in Video Games,” Media Psychology 14, no. 3 (2011): 289-311;
Travis L. Dixon and Daniel Linz, “Overrepresentation and Underrepresentation of African
Americans and Latinos as Lawbreakers on Television News,” Journal of Communication
50, no. 2 (2000): 131-54; Travis L. Dixon and Daniel Linz, “Race and the Misrepresentation
of Victimization on Local Television News,” Communication Research 27, no. 5 (2000):
547-73; Lee and Joo, “The Portrayal of Asian Americans in Mainstream Magazine Ads,”
654-71; Mastro and Behm-Morawitz, “Latino Representation on Primetime Television,”
110-30; Mastro and Greenberg, “The Portrayal of Racial Minorities on Prime Time
Television,” 690-703; Mary Beth Oliver and Dana Fonash, “Race and Crime in the
News: Whites’ Identification and Misidentification of Violent and Nonviolent Criminal
Suspects,” Media Psychology 4, no. 2 (2002): 137-56; Mary Beth Oliver, “Portrayals of
Crime, Race, and Aggression in “Reality-Based” Police Shows: A Content Analysis,”
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 38, no. 2 (1994): 179-92; Park, Holody, and
Zhang, “Race in Media Coverage of School Shootings,” 475-94.

7. §.Parrottand F. D. Carpentier, “Media Stereotypes and the Stigmatization of Mental Illness:
The Role of Adjoining and Adjacent Primes.” (conference paper, Mass Communication and
Society Division of the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication
2012 Conference, Chicago, 2012); R. G. Nairn and J. H. Coverdale, “People Never See Us
Living Well: An Appraisal of the Personal Stories about Mental IlIness in a Prospective
Print Media Sample,” Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 39, no. 4 (2005):
281-87; Ruth Allen and Raymond G. Nairn, “Media Depictions of Mental Illness: An
Analysis of the Use of Dangerousness,” Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry
31, no. 3 (1997): 375-81; Otto F. Wahl, Media Madness: Public Images of Mental Iliness
(New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1997).
Bissell and Parrott 263

 

8.

Jennifer Stevens Aubrey and Kristen Harrison, “The Gender-Role Content of Children’s
Favorite Television Programs and Its Links to Their Gender-Related Perceptions,”
Media Psychology 6, no. 2 (2004): 111-46; Behm-Morawitz and Mastro, “Mean Girls?,”
131-46; Devitt, “Framing Gender on the Campaign Trail,” 445-63; Jami A. Fullerton
and Alice Kendrick, “Portrayal of Men and Women in US Spanish-Language Television
Commercials,” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 77, no. 1 (2000): 128-42;
Nancy Signorielli, “The Stigma of Mental Illness on Television,” Journal of Broadcasting
& Electronic Media 33, no. 3 (1989): 325-31.

. Rebecca L. Pearl, Rebecca M. Puhl, and Kelly D. Brownell, “Positive Media Portrayals of

Obese Persons: Impact on Attitudes and Image Preferences,” Health Psychology 31, no. 6
(2012): 821-29. doi:10.1037/a0027189; Linda Lin and Kathleen Reid, “The Relationship
between Media Exposure and Antifat Attitudes: The Role of Dysfunctional Appearance
Beliefs,” Body Image 6, no. 1 (2009): 52-55; Kim Bissell and Hal Hays, “Understanding
Anti-fat Bias in Children: The Role of Media and Appearance Anxiety in Third to Sixth
Graders’ Implicit and Explicit Attitudes toward Obesity,” Mass Communication & Society
14, no. 1 (2011): 113-40. doi:10.1080/15205430903464592.

. Dalisay and Tan, “Assimilation and Contrast Effects inthe Priming,” 7-22; Travis L. Dixon,

“Psychological Reactions to Crime News Portrayals of Black Criminals: Understanding the
Moderating Roles of Prior News Viewing and Stereotype Endorsement,” Communication
Monographs 73, no. 2 (2006): 162-87; Cassie A. Eno and David R. Ewoldsen, “The
Influence of Explicitly and Implicitly Measured Prejudice on Interpretations of and
Reactions to Black Film,” Media Psychology 13, no. 1 (2010): 1-30; Givens and Monahan,
“Priming Mammies, Jezebels, and Other Controlling Images,” 87-106; Dana Mastro and
Riva Tukachinsky, “The Influence of Exemplar versus Prototype-Based Media Primes
on Racial/Ethnic Evaluations,” Journal of Communication 61, no. 5 (2011): 916-37;
Dana Mastro et al., “The Influence of Exposure to Depictions of Race and Crime in TV
News on Viewers Social Judgments,” Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 53,
no. 4 (2009): 615-35; Dana E. Mastro, Elizabeth Behm-Morawitz, and Maria A. Kopacz,
“Exposure to Television Portrayals of Latinos: The Implications of Aversive Racism
and Social Identity Theory,” Human Communication Research 34, no. 1 (2008): 1-27;
Srividya Ramasubramanian, “The Impact of Stereotypical versus Counterstereotypical
Media Exemplars on Racial Attitudes, Causal Attributions, and Support for Affirmative
Action,” Communication Research 38, no. 4 (2011): 497-516; Srividya Ramasubramanian,
“Television Viewing, Racial Attitudes, and Policy Preferences: Exploring the Role of
Social Identity and Intergroup Emotions in Influencing Support for Affirmative Action,”
Communication Monographs 77, no. 1 (2010): 102-20; Srividya Ramasubramanian,
“Media-Based Strategies to Reduce Racial Stereotypes Activated by News Stories,”
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 84, no. 2 (2007): 249-64; Srividya
Ramasubramanian and Mary Beth Oliver, “Activating and Suppressing Hostile and
Benevolent Racism: Evidence for Comparative Media Stereotyping,” Media Psychology
9, no. 3 (2007): 623-46; Rocio Rivadeneyra, L. Monique Ward, and Maya Gordon,
“Distorted Reflections: Media Exposure and Latino Adolescents’ Conceptions of Self,”
Media Psychology 9, no. 2 (2007): 261-90.

. Kimberly L. Bissell, “What Do These Messages Really Mean? Sports Media Exposure,

Sports Participation, and Body Image Distortion in Women between the Ages of 18 and
75,” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 81, no. 1 (2004): 108-23; J. Robyn
Goodman and Kim Walsh-Childers, “Sculpting the Female Breast: How College Women
Negotiate the Media’s Ideal Breast Image,” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly
81, no. 3 (2004): 657-74; J. Robyn Goodman, “Flabless Is Fabulous: How Latina and
264 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

Anglo Women Read and Incorporate the Excessively Thin Body Ideal into Everyday
Experience,” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 79, no. 3 (2002): 712-27;
Gemma Lépez-Guimera et al., “Influence of Mass Media on Body Image and Eating
Disordered Attitudes and Behaviors in Females: A Review of Effects and Processes,”
Media Psychology 13, no. 4 (2010): 387-416; Donnalyn Pompper, Jorge Soto, and Lauren
Piel, “Male Body Image and Magazine Standards: Considering Dimensions of Age and
Ethnicity,” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 84, no. 3 (2007): 525-45.

12. Mary Beth Oliver et al., “The Effect of Narrative News Format on Empathy for Stigmatized
Groups,” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 89, no. 2 (2012): 205-24.

13. Jerel P. Calzo and L. Monique Ward, “Media Exposure and Viewers’ Attitudes toward
Homosexuality: Evidence for Mainstreaming or Resonance?,” Journal of Broadcasting &
Electronic Media 53, no. 2 (2009): 280-99; Noelle R. Collier, Christine A. Lumadue, and
H. Ray Wooten, “Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Xena: Warrior Princess: Reception of the
Texts by a Sample of Lesbian Fans and Web Site Users,” Journal of Homosexuality 56, no.
5 (2009): 575-609; Sarah C. Gomillion and Traci A. Giuliano, “The Influence of Media
Role Models on Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Identity,” Journal of Homosexuality 58, no. 3
(2011): 330-54.

14. JoAnn A. Thornton and Otto F. Wahl, “Impact of a Newspaper Article on Attitudes toward
Mental Illness,” Journal of Community Psychology 24, no. 1 (1996): 17-25; Parrott and
Carpentier, “Media Stereotypes and the Stigmatization of Mental Illness.”

15. “Overweight and Obesity,” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, www.cdc.gov/
obesity.

16. S.S. Wang, Kelly D. Brownell, and T. A. Wadden, “The Influence of the Stigma of Obesity
on Overweight Individuals,” Znternational Journal of Obesity 28, no. 10 (2004): 1333-37.

17. Richard M. Lerner and Sam J. Korn, “The Development of Body-Build Stereotypes in
Males,” Child Development 43, no. 3 (1972): 908-20; Tracy Anesbury and Marika
Tiggemann, “An Attempt to Reduce Negative Stereotyping of Obesity in Children by
Changing Controllability Beliefs,” Health Education Research 15, no. 2 (2000): 145-52.

18. Lerner and Korn, “Body-Build Stereotypes in Males,” 908-20; Anesbury and Tiggemann,
“An Attempt to Reduce Negative Stereotyping,” 145-52.

19. Gordon W. Allport, “Attitudes,” in 4 Handbook of Social Psychology, ed. Carl Murchison
(Worcester, MA: Clark University Press, 1935), 798-844.

20. Richard E. Petty and John T. Cacioppo, Attitudes and Persuasion: Classic and
Contemporary Approaches (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1996).

21. Russell H. Fazio, “Attitudes as Object-Evaluation Associations of Varying Strength,”
Social Cognition 25, no. 5 (2007): 603-37.

22. Alice H. Eagly and Shelly Chaiken, The Psychology of Attitudes (Orlando, FL: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich College Publishers, 1993).

23. Eagly and Chaiken, The Psychology of Attitudes.

24. Eagly and Chaiken, The Psychology of Attitudes.

25. Petty and Cacioppo, Attitudes and Persuasion.

26. Petty and Cacioppo, Attitudes and Persuasion.

27. Bruce G. Link and Jo C. Phelan, “Conceptualizing Stigma,” Annual Review of Sociology
27 (2001): 363-85.

28. Robert J. Rydell and Allen R. McConnell, “Understanding Implicit and Explicit Attitude
Change: A Systems of Reasoning Analysis,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
91, no. 6 (2006): 995-1008.

29. Fritz Strack and Roland Deutsch, “Reflective and Impulsive Determinants of Social
Behavior,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 8, no. 3 (2004): 220-47.
Bissell and Parrott 265

 

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

Anthony G. Greenwald and Mahzarin R. Banaji, “Implicit Social Cognition: Attitudes,
Self-Esteem, and Stereotypes,” Psychological Review 102, no. 1 (1995): 4-27.

John A. Bargh et al., “The Generality ofthe Automatic Attitude Activation Effect,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 62, no. 6 (1992): 893-912; Russell H. Fazio et al.,
“On the Automatic Activation of Attitudes,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
50, no. 2 (1986): 229-38. doi:10.1037/0022-35 14.50.2.229.

Marlene B. Schwartz et al., “Weight Bias among Health Professionals Specializing in
Obesity,” Obesity Research 11, no. 9 (2003): 1033-39; Bethany A. Teachman et al.,
“Demonstrations of Implicit Anti-fat Bias: The Impact of Providing Causal Information
and Evoking Empathy,” Health Psychology 22, no. 1 (2003): 68-78.

Patricia G. Devine et al., “The Regulation of Explicit and Implicit Race Bias: The Role of
Motivations to Respond without Prejudice,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
82, no. 5 (2002): 835-48; Eno and Ewoldsen, “The Influence of Explicitly and Implicitly
Measured Prejudice,” 1-30.

Tara S. Peris, Bethany A. Teachman, and Brian A. Nosek, “Implicit and Explicit Stigma of
Mental Illness: Links to Clinical Care,” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 196,
no. 10 (2008): 752-60; Nicolas Riisch et al., “Implicit Self-Stigma in People with Mental
Illness,” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 198, no. 2 (2010): 150-53; Bethany
A. Teachman, Joel G. Wilson, and Irina Komarovskaya, “Implicit and Explicit Stigma
of Mental Illness in Diagnosed and Healthy Samples,” Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology 25, no. 1 (2006): 75-95.

Leslie J. Heinberg, “Theories of Body Image Disturbance: Perceptual, Developmental
and Sociocultural Factors,” in Body Image, Eating Disorders and Obesity: An Interactive
Guide for Assessment and Treatment, ed. J. Kevin Thompson (Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association, 1996): 27-47.

Gordon W. Allport, The Nature of Prejudice (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1954).
John Coverdale, Raymond Nair, and Donna Claasen, “Depictions of Mental Illness in Print
Media: A Prospective National Sample,” Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry
36, no. 5 (2002): 697-700; Donald L. Diefenbach and Mark D. West, “Television and
Attitudes toward Mental Health Issues: Cultivation Analysis and the Third-Person Effect,”
Journal of Community Psychology 35, no. 2 (2007): 181-95; Darcy Haag Granello and
Pamela S. Pauley, “Television Viewing Habits and Their Relationship to Tolerance toward
People with Mental IIness,” Journal of Mental Health Counseling 22, no. 2 (2000): 162-75;
Raymond G. Nairn, “Media Portrayals of Mental Illness, or Is It Madness? A Review,”
Australian Psychologist 42, no. 2 (2007): 138-46; Heather Stuart, “Media Portrayal of
Mental Illness and Its Treatments: What Effect Does It Have on People with Mental
Illness?,” CNS Drugs 20, no. 2 (2006): 99-106; Otto F. Wahl, “Mass Media Images of
Mental Illness: A Review of the Literature,” Journal of Community Psychology 20, no. 4
(1992): 343-52; Otto F. Wahl, “News Media Portrayal of Mental Illness Implications for
Public Policy,” American Behavioral Scientist 46, no. 12 (2003): 1594-1600.

Burgess et al., “Playing with Prejudice,” 289-311; Dixon and Linz, “Overrepresentation
and Underrepresentation,” 131-54; Dixon and Linz, “Race and the Misrepresentation of
Victimization,” 547-73; Lee and Joo, “The Portrayal of Asian Americans in Mainstream
Magazine Ads,” 654-71; Mastro and Behm-Morawitz, “Latino Representation on
Primetime Television,” 110-30; Mastro and Greenberg, “The Portrayal of Racial
Minorities on Prime Time Television,” 690-703; Oliver and Fonash, “Race and Crime in
the News,” 137-56; Oliver, “Portrayals of Crime, Race, and Aggression in ‘Reality-Based’
Police Shows,” 179-92; Park, Holody, and Zhang, “Race in Media Coverage of School
Shootings,” 475-94.
266 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

39. Aubrey and Harrison, “The Gender-Role Content of Children’s Favorite Television
Programs,” 111-46; Behm-Morawitz and Mastro, “Mean Girls?,” 131-46; Devitt, “Framing
Gender on the Campaign Trail,” 445-63; Fullerton and Kendrick, “Portrayal of Men and
Women in U.S. Spanish-Language Television Commercials,” 128-42; Signorielli, “The
Stigma of Mental Illness,” 325-31.

40. Gregory Fouts and Rebecca Inch, “Homosexuality in TV Situation Comedies,” Journal of
Homosexuality 49, no. 1 (2005): 35-45.

41. Signorielli, “Aging on Television: Messages Relating to Gender, Race, and Occupation in
Prime Time,” 279-301; Signorielli, “Aging on Television: The Picture in the Nineties,”
34-38.

42. Hugh Klein and Kenneth S. Shiffman, “Messages about Physical Attractiveness in
Animated Cartoons,” Body Image 3, no. 4 (2006): 353-63.

43. Marci M. Glessner, John H. Hoover, and Lisa A. Hazlett, “The Portrayal of Overweight
in Adolescent Fiction,” Reclaiming Children and Youth: The Journal of Strength-Based
Interventions 15, no. 2 (2006): 116-23.

44. Sherry L. Tumer et al., “The Influence of Fashion Magazines on the Body Image
Satisfaction of College Women: An Exploratory Analysis,” Adolescence (1997): 603-17;
Renée A. Botta, “Television Images and Adolescent Girls’ Body Image Disturbance,”
Journal of Communication 49, no. 2 (1999): 22-41; Lisa M. Groesz, Michael P. Levine,
and Sarah K. Murnen, “The Effect of Experimental Presentation of Thin Media Images on
Body Satisfaction: A Meta-analytic Review,” Jnternational Journal of Eating Disorders
31, no. 1 (2002): 1-16.

45. Gregory Fouts and Kimberley Burggraf, “Television Situation Comedies: Female Body
Images and Verbal Reinforcements,” Sex Roles 40, no. 5 (1999): 473-81; Gregory Fouts
and Kimberley Burggraf, “Television Situation Comedies: Female Weight, Male Negative
Comments, and Audience Reactions,” Sex Roles 42, no. 9 (2000): 925-32.

46. Bradley S. Greenberg et al., “Portrayals of Overweight and Obese Individuals on
Commercial Television,” American Journal of Public Health 93, no. 8 (2003): 1342-48.

47. Gregory Fouts and Kimberley Vaughan, “Television Situation Comedies: Male Weight,
Negative References, and Audience Reactions,” Sex Roles 46, no. 11 (2002): 439-42;
Fouts and Burggraf, “Television Situation Comedies: Female Body Images and Verbal
Reinforcements,” 473-81.

48. Greenberg et al., “Portrayals of Overweight,” 1342-48.

49. Fouts and Vaughan, “Television Situation Comedies: Male Weight, Negative References,
and Audience Reactions,” 439-42.

50. Allan M. Collins and Elizabeth F. Loftus, “A Spreading-Activation Theory of Semantic
Processing,” Psychological Review 82, no. 6 (1975): 407-28.

51. Givens and Monahan, “Priming Mammies, Jezebels, and Other Controlling Images,”
87-106.

52. E. Tory Higgins, John A. Bargh, and Wendy J. Lombardi, “Nature of Priming Effects on
Categorization,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
11, no. 1 (1985): 59-69.

53. Givens and Monahan, “Priming Mammies, Jezebels, and Other Controlling Images,”
87-106.

54. Hansen and Hansen, “How Rock Music Videos Can Change What Is Seen When Boy
Meets Girl,” 287-316.

55. Parrott and Carpentier, “Media Stereotypes and the Stigmatization of Mental Illness.”
Bissell and Parrott 267

 

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.
63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.
71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

Michael Morgan, “Cultivation Analysis and Media Effects,” in The SAGE Handbook of
Media Processes and Effects, ed. Robin L. Nabi and Mary Beth Oliver (Thousand Oaks,
CA: SAGE, 2009), 69-82.

George Gerbner and Larry Gross, “Living with Television: The Violence Profile,” Journal
of Communication 26, no. 2 (1976): 172-94.

Nancy Signorielli and Margaret Lears, “Children, Television, and Conceptions about
Chores: Attitudes and Behaviors,” Sex Roles 27, no. 3 (1992): 157-70.

Wahl, “News Media Portrayal of Mental Illness Implications for Public Policy,”
1594-1600.

Mastro and Greenberg, “The Portrayal of Racial Minorities on Prime Time Television,”
690-703.

Fouts and Burggraf, “Television Situation Comedies: Female Weight, Male Negative
Comments, and Audience Reactions,” 925-32.

Fouts and Inch, “Homosexuality in TV Situation Comedies,” 35-45.

Michael Morgan, “Television and Adolescents’ Sex Role Stereotypes: A Longitudinal
Study,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 43, no. 5 (1982): 947-55.

L. J. Shrum, “Assessing the Social Influence of Television: A Social Cognition Perspective
on Cultivation Effects,” Communication Research 22, no. 4 (1995): 402-29; L. J. Shrum,
“Psychological Processes Underlying Cultivation Effects: Further Tests of Construct
Accessibility,” Human Communication Research 22, no. 4 (1996): 482-509.

Shrum, “Assessing the Social Influence of Television,” 402-29; Shrum, “Psychological
Processes Underlying Cultivation,” 482-509

L. A. Kirkpatrick and S. Epstein, “Cognitive-Experiential Self-Theory and Subjective
Probability: Further Evidence for Two Conceptual Systems,” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 63, no. 4 (1992): 534-44.

Seymour Epstein, “Cognitive-Experiential Self-Theory of Personality,” in Comprehensive
Handbook of Psychology, Volume 5: Personality and Social Psychology, ed. Theodore
Millon and Melvin J. Lerner (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2003), 159-84.

Seymour Epstein, “Cognitive-Experiential Self-Theory of Personality,” 159-84.

Sylvia Herbozo et al., “Beauty and Thinness Messages in Children’s Media: A Content
Analysis,” Eating Disorders 12, no. 1 (2004): 21-34.

Greenberg et al., “Portrayals of Overweight,” 1342-48.

C. Neil Macrae and Galen V. Bodenhausen, “Social Cognition: Thinking Categorically
about Others,” Annual Review of Psychology 51, no. 1 (2000): 93-120.

John A. Bargh, “The Cognitive Monster: The Case against the Controllability of Automatic
Stereotype Effects,” in Dual-Process Theories in Social Psychology, ed. Shelly Chaiken
and Yaacov Trope (New York: The Guilford Press, 1999), 361-82; Irene V. Blair, “The
Malleability of Automatic Stereotypes and Prejudice,” Personality and Social Psychology
Review 6, no. 3 (2002): 242-61; Patricia G. Devine, “Stereotypes and Prejudice: Their
Automatic and Controlled Components,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
56, no. 1 (1989): 5-18.

Rebecca M. Puhl and Kelly D. Brownell, “Psychosocial Origins of Obesity Stigma: Toward
Changing a Powerful and Pervasive Bias,” Obesity Reviews 4, no. 4 (2003): 213-27.
Galen V. Bodenhausen, “Stereotypes as Judgmental Heuristics: Evidence of Circadian
Variations in Discrimination,” Psychological Science 1, no. 5 (1990): 319-22.

Rebecca M. Puhl and Janet D. Latner, “Stigma, Obesity, and the Health of the Nation’s
Children,” Psychological Bulletin 133, no. 4 (2007): 557-80.
268 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

76. Phebe Cramer and Tiffany Steinwert, “Thin Is Good, Fat Is Bad: How Early Does It Begin?,”
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 19, no. 3 (1998): 429-51; Anesbury and
Tiggemann, “An Attempt to Reduce Negative Stereotyping of Obesity,” 145-52; Marika
Tiggemann and Elise Wilson-Barrett, “Children’s Figure Ratings: Relationship to Self-
Esteem and Negative Stereotyping,” International Journal of Eating Disorders 23, no. 1
(1998): 83-88.

77. Marla E. Eisenberg, Dianne Neumark-Sztainer, and Mary Story, “Associations of
Weight-Based Teasing and Emotional Well-Being among Adolescents,” Archives of
Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 157, no. 8 (2003): 733-87; K. A. Kraig and P. K.
Keel, “Weight-Based Stigmatization in Children,” Jnternational Journal of Obesity 25
(2001): 1661-6.

78. Eisenberg, Neumark-Sztainer, and Story, “Associations of Weight-Based Teasing,” 733-8;
Kraig and Keel, “Weight-Based Stigmatization.”

79. Eisenberg, Neumark-Sztainer, and Story, “Associations of Weight-Based Teasing,” 733.

80. Puhl and Latner, “Stigma, Obesity, and the Health of the Nation’s Children,” 557-80.

81. Cramer and Steinwert, “Thin Is Good, Fat Is Bad,” 429-51.

82. Marie C. Lawson, “Development of Body Build Stereotypes, Peer Ratings, and Self-
Esteem in Australian Children,” Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied 104,
no. | (1980): 111-8.

83. Janet D. Latner and Albert J. Stunkard, “Getting Worse: The Stigmatization of Obese
Children,” Obesity Research 11, no. 3 (2003): 452-56.

84. Allport, The Nature of Prejudice.

85. Christian S. Crandall and Charles Stangor, “Conformity and Prejudice,” in On the Nature
of Prejudice: Fifty Years after Allport, ed. John F. Dovidio, Peter Glick, and Laurie A.
Rudman (Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 2008): 293-309.

86. Christian S. Crandall, Amy Eshleman, and Laurie O’Brien, “Social Norms and the
Expression and Suppression of Prejudice: The Struggle for Internalization,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 82, no. 3 (2002): 359-78.

87. G. Neil Martin and Colin D. Gray, “The Effects of Audience Laughter on Men’s and
Women’s Responses to Humor,” The Journal of Social Psychology 136, no. 2 (1996):
221-31.

88. Alison E. Field et al., “Peer, Parent, and Media Influences on the Development of Weight
Concerns and Frequent Dieting among Preadolescent and Adolescent Girls and Boys,”
Pediatrics 107, no. 1 (2001): 54-60.

89. Andrew G. Beatty, “Social Contact with the Elderly and Degree of Collectivism as
Correlates of Ageism in Caucasian and Asian-American Populations,” Gerontologist 52,
no. $1 (2012): 520.

90. Shanto Iyengar and Kyu S. Hahn, “Red Media, Blue Media: Evidence of Ideological
Selectivity in Media Use,” Journal of Communication 59, no. 1 (2009): 19-39.

91. Felicia Pratto et al., “Social Dominance Orientation: A Personality Variable Predicting
Social and Political Attitudes,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67, no. 4
(1994): 741-63.

92. Gregory S. Braswell, Karl S. Rosengren, and Howard Berenbaum, “Gravity, God and
Ghosts? Parents’ Beliefs in Science, Religion, and the Paranormal and the Encouragement
of Beliefs in their Children,” International Journal of Behavioral Development 36, no. 2
(2012): 99-106.

93. Martin Kroh and Peter Selb, “Inheritance and the Dynamics of Party Identification,”
Political Behavior 31, no. 4 (2009): 559-74.
Bissell and Parrott 269

 

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

Paul R. Nail, Helen C. Harton, and Brian P. Decker, “Political Orientation and Modern
versus Aversive Racism: Tests of Dovidio and Gaertner’s (1998) Integrated Model,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84, no. 4 (2003): 754-70.

Deidre Anglin, Bruce Link, and Jo Phelan, “Racial Differences in Stigmatizing Attitudes
toward People with Mental Illness,” Psychiatric Services 57, no. 6 (2006): 857-62.

K. S. O’Brien, J. A. Hunter, and M. Banks, “Implicit Anti-fat Bias in Physical Educators:
Physical Attributes, Ideology and Socialization,” International Journal of Obesity 31, no.
2 (2007): 308-14.

Bandura, “Social Cognitive Theory of Mass Communication,” 94-124; Behm-Morawitz
and Mastro, “Mean Girls?,” 131-46; Knobloch-Westerwick, Appiah, and Alter, “News
Selection Patterns as a Function of Race,” 400-17; Ortiz and Harwood, “A Social
Cognitive Theory Approach,” 615-31.

Dalisay and Tan, “Assimilation and Contrast Effects in the Priming,” 7-22; Dixon and
Maddox, “Skin Tone, Crime News, and Social Reality Judgments,” 1555-70; Givens and
Monahan, “Priming Mammies, Jezebels, and Other Controlling Images,” 87-106; Hansen
and Hansen, “How Rock Music Videos Can Change What Is Seen When Boy Meets
Girl,” 287-316; Hansen, “Priming Sex-Role Stereotypic Event Schemas with Rock Music
Videos,” 371-91.

Busselle, “Television Exposure, Perceived Realism, and Exemplar Accessibility,” 43-67;
Lee and Joo, “The Portrayal of Asian Americans in Mainstream Magazine Ads,” 654—71;
Mastro and Behm-Morawitz, “Latino Representation on Primetime Television,” 110-30;
Mastro and Greenberg, “The Portrayal of Racial Minorities on Prime Time Television,”
690-703; Mastro, Behm-Morawitz, and Ortiz, “The Cultivation of Social Perceptions
of Latinos,” 347-65; Gerbner et al., “Growing Up with Television: The Cultivation
Perspective,” Ist ed., 43-68; Ivory, Gibson, and Ivory, “Gendered Relationships on
Television,” 170-92.

Dietram A. Scheufele, “Framing as a Theory of Media Effects,” Journal of Communication
49, no. 1 (1999): 103-22.

George Gerbner et al., “Growing Up with Television: The Cultivation Perspective,” in
Media Effects: Advances in Theory and Research (1st ed.), ed. Jennings Bryant and Dolf
Zillmann (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1994), 17-42.

Shrum, “Psychological Processes Underlying Cultivation,” 482-509.

Gayle R. Bessenoff, “Can the Media Affect Us? Social Comparison, Self-Discrepancy,
and the Thin Ideal,” Psychology of Women Quarterly 30, no. 3 (2006): 239-51.

Albert Bandura, “Social Learning Theory of Aggression,” Journal of Communication 28,
no. 3 (1978): 12-29.

Christian S. Crandall, “Prejudice against Fat People: Ideology and Self-Interest,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 66 (1994): 882-94.

Greenwald and Banaji, “Implicit Social Cognition,” 4.

Jennifer D. Lundgren, Drew A. Anderson, and Joel Kevin Thompson, “Fear of Negative
Appearance Evaluation: Development and Evaluation of a New Construct for Risk Factor
Work in the Field of Eating Disorders,” Eating Behaviors 5, no. 1 (2004): 75-84.

Dale L. Cusumano and J. Kevin Thompson, “Body Image and Body Shape Ideals in
Magazines: Exposure, Awareness, and Internalization,” Sex Roles 37, no. 9 (1997):
701-21.

Marcela L. Szymanski and Thomas F. Cash, “Body-Image Disturbances and Self-
Discrepancy Theory: Expansion of the Body-Image Ideals Questionnaire,” Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology 14, no. 2 (1995): 134-46.
270 journalism & Communication Monographs | 5(4)

 

110. Bissell, “What Do These Messages Really Mean?,” 108-23.

111. Kristen Harrison, “Television Viewing, Fat Stereotyping, Body Shape Standards, and
Eating Disorder Symptomatology in Grade School Children,” Communication Research
27, no. 5 (2000): 617-40.

112. Kimberly Bissell and Katharine Birchall, “Through the Hoop: How Sports Participation
Displaces Media Use and Is Related to Body Self-Esteem in Competitive Female Athletes,”
Journal of Sports Media 3, no. 2 (2008): 25-59.

113. Pamela J. Shoemaker and Stephen D. Reese, Mediating the Message (White Plains, NY:
Longman, 1996).

114. Epstein, “Cognitive-Experiential Self-Theory of Personality,” 159-84.

115. Shoemaker and Reese, Mediating the Message.

Author Biographies

Kim Bissell (Ph.D., Syracuse University) is a professor in the College of Communication and
Information Sciences at the University of Alabama and the Souther Progress Endowed
Professor in magazine journalism. She serves as the college’s associate dean for research and is
the director of the Institute for Communication and Information Research. Her research interests
lie in the intersection of media, health, and children, and she has studied the social effects of
mass media as it relates to body image for more than a decade and has designed and developed
media and health literacy programs for children and adolescents in the area of health and body
image.

Scott Parrott (Ph.D., The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) is an assistant professor
in the College of Communication and Information Sciences at the University of Alabama. He
studies media and social cognition, including the role of the media in the development, rein-
forcement, and mitigation of stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination. His research primarily
addresses the stigma attached to mental illness and overweight/obesity.
