This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Race Bias, Social Class Bias, and Gender Bias in Clinical

Judgment

Howard N. Garb, Highland Drive V. A. Medical Center and University of Pittsburgh

Studies on race bias, social class bias, and gender bias
are reviewed. Topics include psychodiagnosis and rating
level of adjustment, the description of personality traits
and psychiatric symptoms, the prediction of behavior,
and treatment planning. Replicated findings include
race bias in the differential diagnosis of schizophrenia
and psychotic affective disorders, gender bias In the
differential diagnosis of histrionic and antisocial per-
sonality disorders, race bias and gender bias in the
prediction of violence, and social class bias in the refer-
ral of clients to psychotherapy. Recommendations for
decreasing bias include (a) being aware of when biases
are likely to occur, (b) adhering to diagnostic criteria,
and (c) using statistical prediction rules to predict be-
havior.

Key words: cognitive biases, judgment, personality
assessment, prediction, psychodiagnosis. [Clin Psychol
Sci Prac 4:99-120, 1997]

Misconceptions exist about research on race bias, social
class bias, and gender bias. For example, according to a
recent article in The APA Monitor (Sleek, 1996),

Practitioners tend to judge lower-class patients as more seriously
disturbed than higher-class patients. They detect schizophrenia in
black people more than in whites. And they often judge women
patients as more disturbed than male patients presenting identical
problems. (p. 30)

Address correspondence to Howard N. Garb, Psychalogy Ser-
vice (116B), Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
7180 Highland Drive, Pittsburgh, PA 15206-1297. Electronic
mail may be sent via Internet to garb.howard@pittsburgh.va.
gov. Dr Garb is affiliated with the Department of Psychiatry at
the University of Pennsylvania.

Though these statements may reflect conventional wis-
dom, the statements about social class and gender are not
supported by empirical research, and the statement about
race is true only under limited conditions (when patients
have symptoms of a psychotic affective disorder but not
when they may have a substance-induced psychotic dis-
order). The purpose of this review is to dispel myths
about bias and to help clinicians become aware of biases
that are related to race, social class, and gender.

For the purpose of the present article, race bias, social
class bias, and gender bias are said to occur when the
accuracy of judgments varies as a function of client race,
social class, or gender. For example, race bias is said to
occur when judgments made for White clients are more
accurate than judgments made for Black clients. Notice
that bias is said to occur when the accuracy of judgments
varies as a function of client race, social class, or gender,
not when judgments vary as a function of client race, social
class, or gender.

Accuracy of judgments can vary as a function of client
race, social class, or gender for a number of reasons. For
example, diagnostic criteria can be biased (Funtowicz &
Widiger, 1995; Widiger & Spitzer, 1991). Diagnostic cri-
teria are said to be biased if clinicians adhere to the crite-
ria when making diagnoses and if the diagnoses are more
valid for one group of clients than for another (e.g., if
the diagnoses are more valid for males than for females).
Judgments will also be biased if they are made by using a
self-report personality inventory that is biased (Lindsay &
Widiger, 1995). An item from a personality inventory is
sex biased if (a) it fails to correlate with dysfunction, (b)
it exhibits sex role differences, and (c) it is included as an
item on a scale that is used as a measure of dysfunction.
Another reason the accuracy of judgments can vary as a
function of client race, social class, or gender is related to
data collection. Clinicians may form hypotheses based in

© 1997 AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION D12 + 0969-5893/97/$5.00 99
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

part on the stereotype beliefs they have about race, social
class, and gender. They may then collect information that
can support, but not refute, their hypotheses, and they
may not consider alternative hypotheses. When this
occurs, the confirmatory bias is said to be descriptive of
clinicians (they seek to confirm their hypotheses).
Research indicates that the confirmatory bias is descrip~
tive of how people, including clinicians, make judgments
(e.g., Haverkamp, 1993). Finally, bias may occur because
of the way judges integrate information. Thus, even
when diagnostic criteria, self-report inventories, and the
collection of data are unbiased, judgments can still be
biased.

In the present review, the focus of the studies is on bias
and the integration of information. In all of the studies,
clinicians integrated information. In some of the studies,
clinicians also collected information. If the results of a
study indicate that the integration of information is not
biased for a certain task, it is possible that the judgments
for this task are still biased. For example, the judgments
may be biased because the diagnostic criteria were biased
{assuming the task is to make diagnoses) or because the
judgments were based on a self-report inventory that was
biased. Also, if clinicians in the study made judgments
after reading clinical vignettes or watching videotapes of
interviews, judgments for the same task may be biased in
clinical practice but unbiased in the study because in clin-
ical practice they may collect different information
depending on the race, social class, or gender of the cli-
ents. Thus, from the studies reviewed in this article, con-
clusions can be drawn about the presence of bias related
to the collection of data and/or the interpretation of data,
but we will not be able to conclude that judgments are
unbiased even if biases are not described in any of the
studies.

Race bias, social class bias, and gender bias have been
among the most actively investigated topics in the area of
clinical judgment. A number of reviews have already
been written on these biases. For example, early reviews
concluded that there was little evidence of race bias or
gender bias but some evidence of social class bias (e.g.,
Abramowitz & Dokecki, 1977; Smith, 1980; Stricker,
1977). The occurrence of race bias has been described in
subsequent reviews (e.g., Adebimpe, 1981; Jones & Gray,
1986). More recent reviews (Lopez, 1989; Widiger &
Spitzer, 1991) have focused on methodological and con-
ceptual issues, though they have also described some sub-

stantive results. The present review will focus on
describing substantive results and should serve to update
readers on the findings of the literature.

METHOD

To locate studies, a computer search was conducted using
the PsycLIT (1974-June, 1996) database. The search was
conducted using the following keywords: clinical judg-
ment and sex or gender or race or social class. Articles
were also found by contacting senior research colleagues
and by searching the reference sections of books and
articles on race bias, social class bias, and gender bias.

Studies are included in this review only if level of psy-
chopathology was controlled for. In analogue studies,
level of psychopathology was controlled by experimen-
tally manipulating the reported race, social class, and
gender of the clients. In these studies, clinicians made
judgments after reading case histories or watching video-
tapes of actors portraying clients in interviews. The same
case history might be given to different groups of clini-
cians except clinicians in one group might be told that
the client was male while clinicians in a second group
might be told that the case described a female. Or, male
actors and female actors might follow the same scripts
when portraying 2 client, and different groups of clini-
cians might make their judgments after seeing one of the
interviews. In field studies, judgments made by clinicians
in the course of their clinical work were analyzed. Mea-
sures of clients’ psychopathology were used to predict cli-
nicians’ judgments, and then race, social class, and/or
gender were used to predict the variance that was unac-
counted for by the measures of psychopathology. Studies
are not included if they simply reported that judgments
varied as a function of race, social class, and/or gender.
For example, if the results of a study indicate that Black
patients are more often committed to hospitals than
White patients, the study was included in this review
only if the psychopathology of the Black and White
patients was controlled for. Also, studies will not be
included if the ratings used to control for level of psycho-
pathology were made by the clinicians whose judgments
were being studied rather than by the members of a
research team (e.g., Kirshner & Johnston, 1983).

Other criteria were also used for deciding whether to
include a study in this review. First, studies are not cited
if the ratings were not made by mental health profession-
als or graduate students in a mental health field (e.g.,

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE + V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 100
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Abramowitz & Herrera, 1981). Empirical research indi-
cates that mental health professionals and graduate stu-
dents in a mental health field are often more accurate
than lay judges (Garb, 1989), so it is unclear that results
on bias obtained by using lay judges (e.g., undergradu-
ates) can be generalized to clinicians. Second, ratings had
to be made for clients or psychiatric inpatients. This
includes ratings made for prison inmates if the inmates
had contact with a mental health professional. Third,
assessment information could not be atypical of the infor-
mation that is used in clinical practice. Fourth, judgments
had to be similar to the types of judgments that are made
in clinical practice. Finally, reports of “significant”
differences are not reported if statistical significance tests
were not performed and descriptive statistics were not
reported (e.g., Geller, 1988).

RACE BIAS

Psychodiagnosis

African-American and Hispanic (Puerto Rican) patients
are less likely than White patients to be diagnosed as hav-
ing a psychotic affective disorder and more likely to be
diagnosed as having schizophrenia, even when measures
of psychopathology do not indicate that a diagnosis of
schizophrenia is justified (Blake, 1973; Coleman & Baker,
1994; Loring & Powell, 1988; Mukherjee, Shukla,
Woodle, Rosen, & Olarte, 1983; Pavkov, Lewis, & Lyons,
1989; Simon, Fleiss, Gurland, Stiller, & Sharpe, 1973;
also see Garb, 1996). Three of the studies will be
described.

Simon et al. (1973) collected data on 188 Black and
White hospitalized mental patients. Social class was simi-
lar for both groups. Diagnoses that were made by clinical
staff were compared to diagnoses made by the research
investigators. The research investigators conducted struc-
tured interviews to make their diagnoses. Clinical staff
diagnosed 80% of the Black patients as having schizo-
phrenia and 0% as having an affective disorder. Research
staff diagnosed only 27% of the Black patients as having
schizophrenia and 42% as having an affective disorder. For
White patients, clinical staff made diagnoses of schizo-
phrenia 55% of the time and diagnoses of affective disor-
der 10% of the time. Research staff diagnosed 31% of the
White patients as having schizophrenia and 29% as having
an affective disorder.

Mukherjee et al. (1983) obtained data on 37 White,
21 Black, and 18 Hispanic patients. All of the patients

CLINICAL JUDGMENT - GARB

were diagnosed by the research investigators as having a
bipolar affective disorder. A review of the medical records
indicated that (a) none of the patients had ever had a non-
affective psychotic episode and (b) all of the patients had
a complete remission of symptoms between psychotic
episodes without residual signs of schizophrenia. A
review of the patients’ charts showed that misdiagnoses
of schizophrenia were more common among the Black
and Hispanic patients than among the White patients
(misdiagnoses occurred for 18 of 21 Blacks, 15 of 18 His-
panics, and 19 of 37 Whites). A stepwise multiple regres-
sion analysis showed that race was still significantly related
to misdiagnosis after different measures of psychopathol-
ogy (e.g., auditory hallucinations) and other variables
(e.g., age at first hospitalization) were used to predict
diagnoses for patients who had been misdiagnosed and
for patients who had never been misdiagnosed.

Pavkov et al. (1989) obtained data on 313 psychiatric
inpatients. Nearly all of them were poor: Only 21 of the
313 patients had incomes of more than $12,000 a year.
Chart diagnoses were compared to diagnoses made by the
research investigators. The research investigators used
structured interviews to make their diagnoses. When a
multiple regression analysis was performed to predict
chart diagnoses, being Black was predictive of a diagnosis
of schizophrenia even after the variance attributable to
the structured interview diagnoses was partialed out.

Black patients are not always more likely to be given
a diagnosis of schizophrenia. They were not more likely
to be given a diagnosis of schizophrenia when the task
was to make a differential diagnosis between schizophre-
nia and drug-induced psychosis, In a study conducted in
the United Kingdom (Lewis, Croft-Jeffreys, & David,
1990), 139 psychiatrists read a case history describing an
agitated patient with paranoid delusions. The patient's
family reported that they suspected the patient had been
smoking cannabis. A diagnosis of schizophrenia was more
likely to be given when the patient was described as being
White. Cannabis psychosis was more likely to be listed as
a possible diagnosis when the patient was described as
being Afro-Caribbean.

Race bias has not been reported for other diagnostic
tasks. Race bias was not reported when clinicians made
diagnoses of educably mentally retarded/mildly mentally
handicapped (Huebner & Cummings, 1986), normal,
neurotic, and psychotic (Strickland, Jenkins, Myers, &
Adams, 1988), situational disorder, neurosis, psycho-

101
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

sis, alcoholism, and personality disorder (Bamgbose,
Edwards, & Johnson, 1980), or hysterical, antisocial, and
paranoid personality disorders and anxiety neurosis,
schizophrenia, drug dependence, and alcoholism (War-
ner, 1979). Similarly, race bias was not reported when a
client was most often diagnosed as having a personality
disorder, paranoid psychosis, or neurotic stress reaction
and only infrequently diagnosed as having schizophrenia,
manic-depressive psychosis, or major depressive disorder
(Littlewood, 1992). In all of these studies, mental health
professionals made diagnoses after reading case histories

or watching videotapes of interviews. Clients were
described as being White, Black, or Chicano.

Level of Adjustment

When clinicians made ratings of severity of mental distur-
bance or level of adjustment, the effect of race was gener-
ally not statistically significant (Amira, Abramowitz, &
Gomes-Schwartz, 1977; Bamgbose et al., 1980; Benefee,
Abramowitz, Weitz, & Armstrong, 1976; Bloch,
Weitz, & Abramowitz, 1980; Franklin, 1985; McLaugh-
lin & Balch, 1980; Schwartz & Abramowitz, 1975; Selig-
man, 1968; Strickland et al., 1988; Umbenhauer &
DeWitte, 1978; also see Merluzzi & Merluzzi, 1978). In
all of these studies, clinicians either read case histories or
watched videotapes of interviews. Ratings were made for
African-American, and White
patients. When the effect of race was significant (Strick-
land et al., 1988), White patients were rated as having a
more severe mental disturbance than Black patients.

Mexican-American,

Personality Traits and Psychiatric Symptoms
Children.
children, and when it does occur, ratings may be more
positive for Black children than for White children. In
one study (Stevens, 1981), school psychologists read brief
histories and watched films of children in a classroom.
The same histories were presented for the children of
different races, and the films of behavioral sequences were
edited to ensure that they were similar across races. When
the school psychologists made ratings of hyperactive
behavior (impulsive, fidgety, distractible, confused, insen-
sitive, frustrated, tense, wild, and extroverted), their
ratings did not vary significantly for African-American,
Mexican-American, and White children. In a second
study (Frame, Clarizio, Porter, & Vinsonhaler, 1982),

Race bias is not common in the assessment of

school psychologists were given case histories and test
results. Ratings of intelligence, classroom behavior, per-
sonality, and social relations did not vary significantly by
race for White and Black children.

In two final studies (Nalven, Hofman, & Bierbryer,
1969; Sattler & Kuncik, 1976), psychologists examined
results on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children
(WISC), and they made ratings of ‘effective intelligence.”
Specifically, they were told, “From this WISC pattern,
what is your best guess as to the S’s ‘true IQ’ score, i-e.,
the score which best reflects the S’s ‘effective intelli-
gence’” (Nalven et al., 1969, p. 272; Sattler & Kuncick,
1976, p. 363). Estimates of “effective intelligence” were
higher for Black children and Mexican-American chil-
dren than for White children, even though all of the chil-
dren were described by the same WISC profiles. Though
more favorable ratings were made for the Black and
Mexican-American children, it is not clear if this was
inappropriate. IQ tests are good measures of analytic
intelligence but not of creative or practical intelligence
(Sternberg, 1985; also see Neisser et al., 1996). The rat-
ings of effective intelligence may have had more in com-
mon with practical intelligence than analytic intelligence.
Though it is not clear if the ratings were appropriate, one
can still conclude that ratings for minority children have
not been less favorable than ratings for White children.

Adults.
ings of traits and symptoms are made for adults, the effect
of race is frequently not significant. When the effect of
race is significant, ratings are just as likely to be favorable
for Black clients as for White clients. For example, when
different groups of clinicians read case histories that were
identical except for the designation of the client as being
African American or White, the effect of race was not
statistically significant, or ratings were more favorable for
Black clients. In one study (Umbenhauer & DeWitt,
1978), client race was not significantly related to ratings
of impulse control. This result is interesting because in a
survey of mental health professionals (Wyatt, Powell, &
Bass, 1982), White clinicians had less favorable attitudes
about the impulse control of African-American people
than did Black clinicians. Evidently, White clinicians may
harbor negative attitudes toward African Americans, but
when faced with individual clients, their ratings of
impulse control may not be affected by race. In two other

As with the assessment of children, when rat-

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE - V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 102
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

studies (Benefee et al., 1976; Bloch et al., 1980), the
effect of race was not significant when clinicians made
ratings of emotional maturity, social appropriateness of
sexual behavior, sexual aggressiveness, and adequacy of
sexual functioning. These results also indicate that clini-
cians are not inclined to describe Black clients as being
impulsive. In the same two studies, Black clinicians rated
Black clients as being more socially mature than White
clients, while client race did not affect White clinicians
when they made ratings of social maturity. In a related
study (Franklin, 1985), White clinicians, but not Black
clinicians, rated a Black client as being more mature than
a White client, even though both clients were described
by the same case history except for the designation of
race.

When Black and White actors followed scripts to por-
tray clients, statistically significant effects were found, but
ratings were not consistently more favorable for Black cli-
ents or White clients. In the first study (Strickland et al.,
1988), actors portrayed normal, neurotic, and psychotic
clients. For the normal and neurotic clients, lower ratings
of verbal facility were given to Black clients than White
clients. However, for the psychotic clients, higher ratings
of verbal facility were given to Black clients than White
clients. In the two other studies (Jenkins-Hall & Sacco,
1991; Ridley, 1986), White clinicians described Black cli-
ents as being significantly more depressed than White cli-
ents, while Black clinicians described White clients as
being significantly more depressed than Black clients. In
these studies, the clients were not psychotic and they
were not hospitalized. One may contrast these results
with the results from the studies on diagnosis that indi-
cated that many clinicians underdetect depression and
overdiagnose schizophrenia in psychotic Black hospital-
ized patients. Finally, other results from the same two
studies can also be described. Jenkins-Hall and Sacco
(1991) reported that ratings of hostility, anxiety, and fear-
fulness were unaffected by client race. For clients who
expressed pessimism and helplessness, significant differ-
ences were found between personality ratings for Blacks
and Whites with more negative ratings being made for
Black clients, but the magnitude of the differences was
quite smal]: Ratings were made on 6-point rating scales
and the average difference between ratings for Black and
White clients was .41. Statistical significance tests for
individual items probably would not have shown statisti-

CLINICAL JUDGMENT - GARB

cal significance, but the experimenters performed a statis-
tical significance test between composite scores (sum of
the scores on 17 items) for the Black and White clients.
Ridley (1986) reported that the effect of race was
not significant when clinicians made ratings of tension-
anxiety, anger-hostility, vigor-activity, confusion, or
schizoid. Ratings of friendliness were biased when the
ratings were made by Black clinicians but not when rat-
ings were made by White clinicians: Black clinicians rated
Black clients as being friendlier than White clients.

Bias in the assessment of Asian-American and White
American clients has also been investigated. Individual
differences were observed among Chinese-American and
White-American psychologists and among Japanese and
American psychiatrists. In one study (Li-Repac, 1980),
five White American and five Chinese-American psy-
chologists watched interviews with five White American
and five Chinese-American clients. All of the Chinese-
American clients and two of the Chinese-American psy-
chologists were born in China or Hong Kong. The cli-
ents were not actors following a script but were actual
clients at mental health facilities. They had a range of
diagnoses including “neurotic, character disorder, and
schizophrenic.” Since all of the clinicians watched tapes
of all the interviews, conclusions can be drawn about
individual differences among the clinicians. Clinicians
made ratings for six categories of items: (a) submissive-
ness/dependence, (b) depression/inhibition, (c) expres-
sive ability, (d) anxiety, (e) severe pathology/psychosis,
and (f} social poise/interpersonal capacity. The effect of
clinician ethnicity was not significant for ratings of sub-
missiveness-dependence, expressive ability, or anxiety.
However, the White American psychologists rated the
Chinese-American clients as being more depressed and
inhibited and less socially poised and having less capacity
for interpersonal relationships than did the Chinese-
American psychologists. The Chinese-American psy-
chologists rated the White American clients as having
more severe psychopathology (e.g., unusual thought
associations) than did the White American psychologists.
In another study (Tseng, McDermott, Ogino, & Ebata,
1982), ratings were made by Japanese and American psy-
chiatrists. American psychiatrists were more likely than
Japanese psychiatrists to describe Japanese fathers as being
nonparticipatory and passive in family interactions. These
results suggest that when one is more familiar with a cli-

103
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ent’s culture, one may be less likely to infer that psycho-
pathology and maladaptive behaviors are present.

Behavioral Prediction

Behavioral predictions were made for children in one
study. In this study (Huebner & Cummings, 1986),
school psychologists made ratings for children who were
purportedly referred for a psychoeducational assessment
by their classroom teacher. They were given background
information, information about classroom behavior, and
test results. Independent variables were race of the child
(Black or White) and nature of the test results (normal,
borderline/ambiguous, or mildly mentally handicapped).
Race of client did not affect predictions of academic,
social, adaptive, or vocational behavior.

Prognostic ratings were made for adult clients in sev-
eral studies. In all of the studies, different groups of clini-
cians were given different case histories that were
identical except for the designation of race, or they
watched videotapes of actors portraying clients and the
videotapes were identical except for the race of the
actors. When prognostic ratings made by White and
Black clinicians were pooled together, prognoses were
more favorable for Black clients than for White clients in
three studies (Lewis et al., 1990; Schwartz & Abramow-
itz, 1975; Strickland et al., 1988) and equally favorable
for Black clients and White clients in one study (Rabi-
nowitz & Lukoff, 1995). When ratings were analyzed
separately for White and Black clinicians, prognoses
made by White clinicians were unaffected by client race
(Bloch et al., 1980; Franklin, 1985), but Black clinicians
tended to make prognoses that were more favorable for
Black chents than White clients (Benefee et al., 1976;
Franklin, 1985).

Though prognostic ratings were not less favorable for
Black clients than White clients, one can speculate that
for at least one special case Black clients are given worse
prognoses. Studies on diagnosis have indicated that
patients with a psychotic affective disorder are more likely
to be misdiagnosed as having schizophrenia if they are
African American rather than White (e.g., Mukherjee et
al., 1983; Pavkov et al., 1989; Simon et al., 1973). One
would expect that if a patient is misdiagnosed as having
schizophrenia, the patient would be seen as having a
more pessimistic prognosis than a patient who is diag-
nosed as having a psychotic affective disorder.

Race bias was observed when clinicians at a psychiatric

hospital were asked to predict whether patients would be
readmitted to their hospital within 2 years (Stack, Lan-
non, & Miley, 1983). When predicting rehospitalization,
one should consider the probable course of a person's
mental disorder but one can also consider social factors,
for example, whether a person is homeless, whether a
person will seek to avoid conflicts at home by being read-
mitted to the hospital. Clinicians expected severity of ill-
ness to be a strong predictor of rehospitalization but it
was not. Number of previous hospitalizations was a
stronger predictor. With regard to race bias, clinicians
predicted that 63% of the White patients and 81% of the
minority patients (African Americans, American Indians)
would be rehospitalized. However, when the patients
were followed for two years, 45% of the White patients
and only 42% of the minority patients were readmitted.
Race bias has been reported when clinicians predicted
the occurrence of violence in psychiatric hospitals or
prisons, but it has not been observed when clinicians pre-
dicted suicide, compliance with medicine, or the occur-
rence of violence in the community. For example, risk of
violence was rated as being greater for Black patients than
White patients when psychiatric residents made predic-
tions after interviewing patients when they were first
admitted to a psychiatric hospital (McNiel & Binder,
1995). The patients were observed on the ward for 1
week after the residents made their predictions, and the
investigators were able to conclude that the risk of vio-
lence was overestimated for the Black patients but not for
the White patients. Similarly, the risk of violence on a
psychiatric ward was rated as being greater for Black
patients than White patients when different groups of
British psychiatrists read a case history that differed only
in the designation of patient race (Lewis et al., 1990).
Race bias was also observed when psychologists and case
managers at federal correctional institutions predicted
the occurrence of violence within 6 months of imprison-
ment (Cooper & Werner, 1990). Black inmates and
American Indian inmates were predicted to be more
violent than White inmates, but race was not significantly
correlated with the occurrence of violence. For the pre-
diction of suicide and the prediction of compliance with
treatment, race bias was not observed when British psy-
chiatrists read case histories that differed with respect
to race of patient (Lewis et al., 1990). Finally, race bias
was not reported when clinicians predicted violence in
the community (Lidz, Mulvey, & Gardner, 1993; Lewis

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE + V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 104
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

et al., 1990). In one of these studies (Lidz et al., 1993),
predictions were made for individuals seen at the emer-
gency room of a psychiatric hospital. The individuals,
and their significant others, were then interviewed by
members of the research team over the following 6
months to learn if they had been violent. Predictions of
violence did not vary in accuracy for the White and
Black patients.

Treatment Planning

Children and Adolescents. When treatment planning
decisions were made for children, the effect of client race
was not statistically significant in analogue studies. In the
analogue studies, the effect of client race was not statisti-
cally significant when the task was to indicate if a referral
should be made to a learning disability remedial program
(Amira et al., 1977; Huebner & Cummings, 1986;
Matuszek & Oakland, 1979), advise students on choos-
ing a college and a career (Smith, 1974), and decide if
child abuse should be reported (Zellman, 1992, see his
Table 3).

In the field studies, the results suggest that treatment
planning decisions are as appropriate, or more appro-
priate, for Black children than for White children. For
children who were referred to a learning disability reme-
dial program, referrals were more appropriate for Black
children than for White children in one study (Leinhardt,
Seewald, & Zigmond, 1982), but equally appropriate for
White and Black children in a second study (Payette &
Clarizio, 1994). The strongest evidence of race bias was
obtained in a field study on child abuse (Hampton &
Newberger, 1985). In this study, data were collected at
hospitals and at child protection services. Hospital per-
sonnel were asked to inform the research investigators
when they had children who had been abused. Personnel
at local child protection services were asked to provide
lists of cases that had been reported for possible child
abuse. A large number of the cases of child abuse
described by the hospital personnel were never reported
to the child protection services. Race of child was a sig-
nificant predictor of failure to report abuse: Cases of child
abuse were less likely to be reported when children were
White than when they were Black. The inclusion of race
in a stepwise discriminant function was statistically sig-
nificant even when race was entered into the discriminant
function after the following predictors: nature of emo-
tional abuse, role of mother, and family income.

CLINICAL JUDGMENT + GARB

Adults, African Americans are overrepresented among
adults hospitalized in, and committed to, public psychiat-
nic hospitals (Lindsey & Paul, 1989). A range of explana-
tions for why Blacks are overrepresented has been offered
(e.g., Blacks are more likely to be committed because
they are less likely to enter a hospital voluntarily). Of
great concer is the proposed explanation that mental
health professionals are biased against Blacks.

Research indicates that clinicians are not biased against
Blacks when they decide whether to hospitalize and/or
commit patients. This has been found when psychologists
and psychiatrists made their judgments after reading case
vignettes (Bamgbose et al. 1980; Lewis et al., 1990;
Schwartz & Abramowitz, 1975) and when clinicians
made decisions in the course of their clinical work (Lind-
sey, Paul, & Mariotto, 1989). The study by Lindsey et al.
(1989) is especially noteworthy. Data were collected on
12 psychiatric inpatient units. Blacks were overrepre-
sented among all admissions compared to the population
densities for the catchment areas. African Americans were
also overrepresented among the committed patients. By
having trained observers code the behaviors of the staff
and patients on the 12 psychiatric inpatient units, the
investigators were able to conclude that Black and White
voluntary patients did not differ in their level of function-
ing though Black voluntary patients did exhibit more
dangerous behavior than White voluntary patients. Black
and White involuntary (committed) patients did not
differ in their level of functioning or in their level of dan-
gerous behavior. All of these results indicate that deci-
sions to admit someone to the hospital and decisions to
commit someone to the hospital were not biased against
Blacks—at least there was not a bias to treat Blacks in a
more restrictive fashion.

Race bias has been well documented in the prescrip-
tion of antipsychotic medications. The occurrence of race
bias depends, at least in part, on the symptomatology of
the patients. For example, the effect of race was not
significant when psychiatrists read the case history of a
nonpsychotic client described as being depressed, perfec-
tionistic, and having somatic complaints and sexual con-
flicts (Schwartz & Abramowitz, 1975). Race bias has been
reported in several studies when patients have had psy-
chotic symptoms. For example, a review of the medical
records of 76 patients with bipolar affective disorder
revealed that White patients were more often properly
diagnosed and were more often given lithium than were

105
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Black and Hispanic patients (Mukherjee et al., 1983).
Similarly, in a study conducted in South Africa, depres-
sion was underdetected in Black patients, and patients
who were depressed (as assessed by a research team using
the Present State Examination; Wing, Cooper, & Sarto-
rius, 1974) were almost five times more likely to receive
treatment for depression if they were White or Coloured
than if they were Black (Eik, Dickman, & Teggin, 1986).
The effect of race was also significant in the United King-
dom when psychiatrists read case histories that described
a patient who may have been abusing cannabis. Cannabis
psychosis was more often considered as a diagnosis when
the patient was described as being Afro-Caribbean rather
than White, and neuroleptic medicine was more often
recommended for White patients than Afro-Caribbean
patients (Lewis et al., 1990). Finally, race bias in the pre-
scription of neuroleptic medicine has recently been docu-
mented in the United States (Segal, Bola, & Watson,
1996). Data were collected and analyzed for 442 patients
who went to psychiatric emergency rooms at four general
hospitals. Of the 442 patients, 256 were Caucasian, 107
were African American, 47 were Hispanic, 10 were
Asian, and 22 were from other ethnic or racial groups.
Regarding the results, even after the investigators con-
trolled for (a) presence of a psychotic disorder, (b) severity
of psychiatric disturbance (GAS score), (c) dangerousness,
(d) psychiatric history, and (e) whether physical restraints
were used, African-American patients, compared to the
other patients, received a significantly larger number of
psychiatric medications, a significantly larger number of
doses of antipsychotic medicine, and a significantly larger
number of injections of antipsychotic medication.

The effect of race was generally nonsignificant when
clinicians made decisions about psychotherapy. In all of
the studies on decisions about psychotherapy, different
groups of clinicians read case histories that differed in the
designation of client race. Client race generally had no
effect when judging (a) whether clients were likely to
benefit from psychotherapy (Benefee et al., 1976; Blake,
1973; Franklin, 1985; Seligman, 1968; Vail, 1970), (b)
whether clients should be seen for short-term or long-
term psychotherapy (Bloch et al., 1980; McLaughlin &
Balch, 1980; Tomlinson-Clarke & Cheatham, 1993), and
(c) whether clients should be seen in individual, couple,
group, or family therapy and whether the therapy should
be behavioral, nondirective, or insight-oriented (Frank-
lin, 1985; Lewis et al., 1990; McLaughlin & Balch, 1980;

Schwartz & Abramowitz, 1975; Vail, 1970). In the few
instances when client race was significant, the treatment
recommendations were no more favorable for White cli-
ents than for Black clients (Benefee et al., 1976; Franklin,
1985; Strickland et al., 1988). For example, in one of the
studies (Strickland et al., 1988), clinical psychology grad~
uate students gave higher ratings of likelihood of success-
ful therapy to Black clients than White clients.

SOCIAL CLASS BIAS
Psychodiagnosis and Ratings of Level of Adjustment
Mental illness occurs most frequently, and with greatest
severity, among the poor. Several explanations for the
relation between mental illness and poverty have been
offered. Stressors associated with poverty may contribute
to mental illness. At the same time, the occurrence of
mental illness can contribute to a downward decline in
socioeconomic status. Another possible explanation, pro-
posed by Hollingshead and Redlich (1958), is that diag-
noses and ratings of level of adjustment may be biased.
Research has not established that social bias occurs
when clinicians make diagnoses and ratings of level of
adjustment. Early research indicated that social class bias
is present (Abramowitz & Dokecki, 1977). That is, men-
tal illness was more often reported when a client's back-
ground was described as being lower-class rather than
middle-class or upper-class and when the clinicians were
given Rorschach Inkblot Test results (Haase, 1964;
Tracheman, 1971), case history information and IQ scores
(Neer, Foster, Jones, & Reynolds, 1973), or recordings of
an interview (DiNardo, 1975; Lee & Temerlin, 1970).
The effect of social class was also significant in a later
study when clinicians made diagnoses after viewing vid-
eotapes of interviews (Luepnitz, Randolph, & Gutsch,
1982). However, in most of the studies published in the
last 20 years, lower-class subjects have not been diagnosed
as having more severe mental disorders than middle-class
or upper-class clients. This has been true when clinicians
have been given case history information (Bamgbose et
al., 1980; Franklin, 1985; Hardy & Johnson, 1992; Settin,
1982; Sutton & Kessler, 1986; Umbenhauer & DeWitte,
1978) and when they have been given case history infor-
mation and IQ scores (Amira et al., 1977). Studies
reporting nonsignificant social class effects have employed
larger clinician sample sizes than studies reporting sig-
nificant social class effects (an average clinician sample
size of 266 vs. an average clinician sample size of 49).

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE + V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 106
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

When more severe diagnoses or ratings are made for
clients of lower social class, one should not assume that
the diagnoses or ratings are biased against these clients.
For example, in one of the studies (Luepnitz et al., 1982),
clinicians, after viewing videotapes of actors portraying
clients who met the DSM-III criteria for alcohol abuse,
were more likely to make correct diagnoses of alcohol
abuse when the clients were described as being lower
social class than when the clients were described as being
upper social class. They underdetected the disorder for
the clients who were described as being upper social class.

Personality Traits and Psychiatric Symptoms

Social class effects were usually not significant when rat-
ings of traits and symptoms were made for children, and
when social class was significant, ratings were more favor-
able for lower social class children. The effect of social
class was not significant when school psychologists read
fictitious case histories and watched films of children in a
classroom setting and then made ratings for the folowing
traits: impulsive, fidgety, distractible, confused, insensi-
tive, frustrated, tense, wild, and extroverted (Stevens,
1981). Similarly, the effect of social class was not signifi-
cant when school psychologists read case history infor-
mation and reviewed psychological test results and then
made ratings of (a) personality, (b) social relationships, (c)
intelligence, and (d) classroom behavior (Frame et al.,
1982). When licensed psychologists were given demo-
graphic information and Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children (WISC) test results, their ratings of “true IQs”
or “effective intelligence” were higher for lower-class
children than middle-class children in one study (Nalven
et al., 1969) but not in another (Sattler & Kuncik, 1976)
even though the second study used the same test protocol
that was used in the first study plus one additional test
protocol.

When ratings were made for adult clients, the effect
of social class was never significant when clinicians
described a client’s psychiatric symptoms but was some-
times significant when they described a client’s personal-
ity traits. For example, ratings were not significantly
affected by social class when clinicians made ratings of
impulse control, anxiety, hypochondriasis, motivation for
change, insight, likeability, warmth, activity, and strength
(Franklin, 1985; Hardy & Johnson, 1992; Settin & Bra-
mel, 1981; Umbenhauer & De Witte, 1978). In the Settin
and Bramel (1981) study, ratings of competency were sig-

CLINICAL JUDGMENT + GARB

nificantly affected by social class but the magnitude of the
difference in ratings was tiny: On a 6-point Likert scale,
the mean ratings for lower-class and middle-class clients
were 2.93 and 2.71, respectively, with higher scores indi-
cating more negative judgments. Judgments were less
favorable for lower-class clients than middle-class clients
when clinicians made the following ratings of personality
traits: self-esteem (Sutton & Kessler, 1986) and self-
confidence, independence, permissiveness, and demo-
cratic values (Briar, 1961). Judgments were also less favor-
able for lower-class clients when they were made by
psychiatric residents who scored high on a scale of
authoritarianism (Kurtz, Kurtz, & Hoffnung, 1970).
These clinicians made ratings using three semantic
differential scales: good-bad, awkward-graceful, and
beautiful-ugly. Finally, in the above studies, clinicians
made ratings after reading case histories. When clinicians
made ratings after reviewing background information
and Rorschach test results, results ranged from bias
against lower-class clients (Levy & Kahn, 1970) to no bias
observed (Trachtman, 1971) to bias against middle-class
clients (Koscherak & Masling, 1972).

Behavioral Predictions

Prognostic ratings were never more favorable for lower-
class clients than for middle-class or upper-class clients.
In several studies, prognostic ratings did not vary as a
function of social class when different groups of clinicians
were given identical case histories except for the designa-
tion of social class (Foon, 1989; Settin & Bramel, 1981)
or when they were given identical Rorschach test results
except for the designation of social class (Koscherak &
Masling, 1972). Similarly, prognostic ratings did not vary
as a function of social class when clinicians interviewed
actors who portrayed clients (Wright & Hutton, 1977).
In other studies, less favorable prognostic ratings were
made for lower-class clients than for middle-class or
upper-class clients when clinicians were given case histor-
ies (Franklin, 1985; Rabinowitz & Lukoff, 1995; Sut-
ton & Kessler, 1986), when they listened to a recording
of an intake interview (Lee & Temerlin, 1970), and when
they were given Rorschach test results (Haase, 1964;
Levy & Kahn, 1970; Trachtman, 1971).

The occurrence of social class bias depends in part on
how experimenters describe clients’ socioeconomic
backgrounds. For example, in one study (Sutton & Kes-
sler, 1986), prognostic ratings for a client described as

107
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

being a commercial artist did not differ significantly from
prognostic ratings for a client described as being a bull-
dozer operator. However, compared to the commercial
artist and the bulldozer operator, prognostic ratings were
significantly worse for a chent who was described as
being an unemployed. welfare recipient with a seventh-
grade education.

Treatment Planning

Children. When school psychologists and other school
personnel rated whether children were eligible for special
education programs, social class effects were either non-
significant or were present in a direction opposite from
what one might expect. In three studies, judges were
given case vignettes and test results that were identical
except for the designation of socioeconomic background.
In two of these studies (Amira et al., 1977; Matuszek &
Oakland, 1979), referrals for remedial programs were
made more frequently for middle-class children than for
lower-class children. In the third study (Frame et al.,
1982), the main effect for social class was not significant
but an interaction between race and social class was: A
special class placement was more often recommended for
an upper-class Black child than for a lower-class Black
child even though the children were described by the
same behavioral and test information. Finally, in a field
study, when referrals were made by school psychologists
in the course of their work, social class bias was reported
to be absent (Bernard & Clarizio, 1981).

The effect of social class was significant for the task
of reporting child abuse. In an analogue study (Zellman,
1992), clinicians were school principals, pediatricians,
psychologists, social workers, child care providers, gen-
eral and family practitioners, and child psychiatrists. A
total of 1,196 professionals made ratings after reading case
histories. For three of six cases, child abuse was more
likely to be reported ifa child’s background was described
as being lower-class rather than middle-class. Social class
was not statistically significant for the other three cases.
Ina field study (Hampton & Newberger, 1985), a dispro-
portionate number of child abuse cases that were not
reported to child protection agencies were from families
of higher income. Even after information about type of
abuse and role of mother was entered into a stepwise dis-
criminant function procedure, household income was
still a statistically significant predictor of whether abuse
was reported.

Adults. Social class bias did not occur when mental
health professionals made decisions regarding hospitaliza-
tion. In two of the studies (Bamgbose et al., 1980;
Hardy & Johnson, 1992), psychology graduate students
and psychologists made recommendations regarding hos-
pitalization after reading case vignettes that were identical
except for the designation of social class. In a third study
(Lindsey et al., 1989), when level of psychopathology and
level of dangerous behavior were controlled for, socio-
economic status did not help to predict whether a patient
would be committed or admitted voluntarily to a psychi-
atric hospital. In a fourth study (Rabinowitz, Massad, &
Fennig, 1995), psychiatrists and psychiatric residents
made reconumendations regarding hospitalization in the
course of their work at a psychiatric hospital in Israel.
Ratings of level of psychopathology were made by mem-
bers of the research team. When level of psychopathol-
ogy was controlled for, level of education was not a
significant predictor of (a) decision to admit patients, (b)
decision to discharge patients, or (c) decision to admit to
an open unit.

Though social class bias was absent when clinicians
made decisions about need for psychiatric hospitalization,
it was present when clinicians made decisions about psy-
chotherapy. Middle-class individuals were more likely to
be recommended for psychotherapy and were expected
to do better in psychotherapy than were lower-class indi-
viduals, and when psychotherapy was recommended, the
lower-class individuals were more likely to be referred for
supportive psychotherapy and the middle-class individu-
als were more likely to be referred for insight-oriented
therapy (Franklin, 1985; Levy & Kahn, 1970; Neumann,
Salganik, Rabinowitz, Bauer, & Kastner, 1990; Rabi-
nowitz & Lukoff; 1995; Routh & King, 1972; Rowden,
Michel, Dillehay, & Martin, 1970; Sucton & Kessler,
1986; Umbenhauer & De Witte, 1978). [However, in one
study, Settin & Bramel (1981), the difference was not sta~
tistically significant, and in another study, Hardy & John-
son (1992), the difference was not statistically significant
and the direction of the difference was not described
though even in this study there was a tendency for clini-
cians to say that they were less attracted to the lower-class
clients.} In all of the studies except one (Neumann et al.,
1990), different groups of clinicians were given case
vignettes that were identical except for the designation
of social class. In the study by Neumann et al. (1990),
individuals at an outpatient clinic in Israel were more

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE - V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 108
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

likely to be referred for psychotherapy if they had a
higher level of education. Diagnosis was also related to
referral to psychotherapy, but since education level and
diagnosis were uncorrelated, one cannot argue that refer-
rals were related to education level because diagnoses
differed across education levels,

Several explanations have been offered to explain why
social class bias occurs when clinicians make decisions
regarding psychotherapy. Social class bias may sometimes
occur because clinicians assume that middle-class clients
are more intelligent than lower-class clients. Presumably
many clinicians believe that intelligence is positively
related to psychotherapy outcome. Similarly, social class
bias may occur because clinicians believe that other vari-
ables that describe the cognitive functioning of clients
(e.g., psychological differentiation and locus of control)
vary with social class and are related to the appropriate-
ness of psychotherapy (Dowds, Fontana, Russakoff, &
Harris, 1977). On the other hand, clinicians may be able
to empathize with middle-class individuals more easily
than they can with lower-class individuals because of
their own background, and for this reason they may
expect to have greater success seeing middle-class clients
in psychotherapy. If it is true that many lower-class indi-
viduals are not seen in psychotherapy because most clini-
cians have middle-class backgrounds, then it would be
important to train more individuals with lower-class
backgrounds as clinicians.

GENDER BIAS

Psychodiagnosis

Females are more likely than males to be diagnosed as
having a histrionic personality disorder, and males are
more likely than females to be diagnosed as having an
antisocial personality disorder, even when female and
male clients do not differ in symptomatology. This has
been true when different groups of clinicians have been
given case histories that are identical except for the desig-
nation of gender (Adler, Drake, & Teague, 1990;
Becker & Lamb, 1994; Fernbach, Winstead, & Derlega,
1989; Ford & Widiger, 1989; Hamilton, Rothbart, &
Dawes, 1986; Loring & Powell, 1988; Warner, 1978,
1979). These biases have been reported for both female
and male clinicians (Adler et al., 1990; Ford & Widiger,
1989; Wamer, 1978), though in one study (Loring &
Powell, 1988) the bias for diagnosing histrionic personal-
ity disorder was reported for White and Black male psy-

CLINICAL JUDGMENT - GARB

chiatrists and Black female psychiatrists but not for White
female psychiatrists.

Gender bias has also occurred when research investigators
have made diagnoses of histrionic personality disorder. In
studies on the prevalence rates of personality disorders,
diagnoses have been made by research investigators using
(a) unstructured clinical interviews or self-report mea-
sures and (b) semistructured interviews. The percentage
of females with diagnoses of histrionic personality was
higher when diagnoses were made on the basis of
unstructured clinical interviews or self-report measures
(81%) compared to when diagnoses were made by using
semistructured interviews (69%; see Corbitt & Widiger,
1995, for a review).

There has been speculation that depression may be
overdiagnosed in females (Potts, Burnam, & Wells, 1991).
However, the effect of gender was not significant when
clinicians made differential diagnoses of adjustment disor-
der, dysthymic disorder, and anxiety disorder (Agell &
Rothblum, 1991; Garfinkle & Morin, 1978), adjustment
reaction and depressive neurosis (Settin, 1982), adjust-
ment reaction, dysthymic disorder, cyclothymic disorder,
and alcohol abuse (Ford & Widiger, 1989), and adjust-
ment disorder, dysthymic disorder, intermittent explosive
disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, schizophrenia,
generalized anxiety disorder, and delusional disorder
(Becker & Lamb, 1994). The effect of gender was sig-
nificant when the task was to make differential diagnoses
of major depressive disorder and organic mental disorder
(Wrobel, 1993): Males were more likely than females to
be diagnosed as having an organic mental disorder while
females described as having the same symptomatology as
males were more likely to be rated as having a severe
depressive disorder.

Gender bias was not reported when diagnoses were
made for other Axis I and Axis II disorders. Gender bias
was not reported when clinicians made diagnoses of
learning disability (Clarizio & Phillips, 1986), schizophre-
nia (Pavkov et al., 1989), or schizophrenia, substance-
induced psychosis, and acute reactive psychosis (Lewis et
al., 1990). For Axis II disorders, the effect of gender bias
has generally not been significant, and when it has been
significant, findings have not been replicated. This has
been true for the diagnosis of borderline personality dis-
order (Adler et al., 1990; Ford & Widiger, 1989; Garb,
1995; Henry & Cohen, 1983; but see Becker & Lamb,
1994), dependent personality disorder (AdJer et al., 1990;

109
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Becker & Lamb, 1994; also see Loring & Powell, 1988,
and Corbitt & Widiger, 1995), narcissistic personality dis-
order (Becker & Lamb, 1994; Ford & Widiger, 1989; but
see Adler et al., 1990), masochistic or self-defeating per-
sonality disorder (Becker & Lamb, 1994; Fuller & Blash-
field, 1989), and passive-aggressive personality disorder
(Ford & Widiger, 1989).

Level of Adjustment
Early research suggested that mental health professionals
view males as being psychologically healthier than
females. In a widely cited and widely criticized study,
Broverman, Broverman, Clarkson, Rosenkrantz, and
Vogel (1970) had psychologists, psychiatrists, and social
workers complete a questionnaire that measured the
social desirability of male stereotype and female stereo-
type traits. The qualities judged desirable for a man were
similar to the qualities judged desirable for a gender-
unspecified adult. For both male and female therapists,
the qualities judged desirable for a female were not simi-
lar to the qualities judged desirable for a gender-
unspecified adult. Broverman et al. (1970) concluded that
“clinicians are significantly less likely to attribute traits
which characterize healthy adults to a woman than they
are likely to attribute these traits to a healthy man” (p. 5).
The Broverman et al. (1970) article has been criti-
cized, among other reasons, because the questionnaire
contained more items that describe socially desirable male
stereotype traits than items that describe socially desirable
female stereotype traits (Stricker, 1977). When the study
was replicated using a questionnaire that contained more
items that describe socially desirable female traits than
items that describe socially desirable male stereotype
traits, ratings of healthy females were similar to ratings for
the gender-unspecified healthy adult and ratings of
healthy males were not similar to the ratings for the gen-
der-unspecified healthy adult (Widiger & Settle, 1987).
In clinical judgment studies, ratings of adjustment have
generally been as high for females as for males. In several
studies, different groups of clinicians were given identical
case vignettes except for the designation of gender. The
effect of client gender was not significant when clients
were described as being: anxious and/or depressed (Aus-
tad & Aronson, 1987; Hardy & Johnson, 1992; Lopez,
Smith, Wolkenstein, & Charlin, 1993; Murray & Abram-
son, 1983; Schover, 1981; Schwartz & Abramowitz,
1975), either psychotic or phobic (Billingsley, 1977),

either passive or aggressive (Dailey, 1980; Fischer, Dula~
ney, Fazio, Hudak, & Zivotofsky, 1976; Prout & Freder~
ickson, 1991; Teri, 1982), or the parents of children who
were mildly defiant of the parents’ rules (McCollum &
Russell, 1992). For exarnple, in one of the studies (Aus-
tad & Aronson, 1987), the case vignettes described clients
who were depressed, were experiencing marital conflicts,
and had personality traits that have been associated with
a healthy adule male but not a healthy adult female
(according to Broverman et al., 1970): Clients were
described as being active, aggressive, independent, ambi-
tious, competitive, and more interested in pursuing a
career than in staying at home to raise a family. As already
noted, the effect of gender was not significant when clini-
cians made ratings of level of adjustment.

The effect of gender was significant in six studies. In
four of the studies, ratings of level of adjustment were
better for female clients than for male clients, at least for a
subset of the clinicians, even though the male and female
clients were described by identical case histories except
for the designation of gender (Hansen & Reekie, 1990;
Lowery & Higgins, 1979; Miller, 1974; Oyster-Nelson &
Cohen, 1981). In a different study (Abramowitz, Abra-
mowitz, Jackson, & Gomes, 1973), politically conserva-
tive clinicians rated a female client as more disturbed than
a male client when both clients were described as being
politically active and liberal and having significant emo-
tional problems. In a final study (Feinblatt & Gold, 1976),
male clients were rated as being less well-adjusted than
female clients when the clients were described as being
passive, and female clients were rated as being less well-
adjusted than male clients when the clients were
described as being aggressive. However, in other studies,
male clients were not described as being less well-
adjusted when the clients were described by fernale stere-
otypic traits (e.g., passive or dependent), and female cli-
ents were not described as being less well-adjusted when
the clients were described by male stereorypic traits (e.g.,
aggressive; Austad & Aronson, 1987; Dailey, 1980;
Fischer et al., 1976; Prout & Frederickson, 1991; Teri,
1982; also see Oyster-Nelson & Cohen, 1981).

Personality Assessment

The effect of gender was not significant on a regular basis
when clinicians made ratings of personality traits and psy-
chiatric symptoms. In‘all of the studies, different groups
of clinicians were given case vignettes that were identical

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE - V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 110
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

except for the designation of gender. In several studies,
the effects of client gender were nonsignificant (Adams &
Betz, 1993; Agell & Rothblum, 1991; Garfinkle &
Morin, 1978; Hardy & Johnson, 1992; Hecker, Trepper,
Wetchler, & Fontaine, 1995; Lopez et al., 1993; Nalven
et al., 1969). Females were rated as being more emotion-
ally mature and intelligent than males in one study
(Fischer et al., 1976), but equally emotionally mature and
less intelligent in a replication study (Dailey, 1980). Simi-
larly, females were rated as being less competent than
males in one study (Settin & Bramel, 1981), but more
competent in a second study (Stearns, Penner, & Kim-
mel, 1980). Stearns et al. (1980) also reported that the
effect of client gender was not statistically significant
when clinicians made ratings for 20 other personality
traits. Finally, a female actor portraying a client was rated
as being more aggressive, ambitious, and independent
than a male actor following the same script (Hayes &
Wolleat, 1978), but nonsignificant results were obtained
for ratings of these personality traits when clinicians read
case histories that were identical except for the designa-
tion of gender (Agell & Rothblum, 1991; Garfinkle &
Morin, 1978; Settin & Bramel, 1981).

Behavioral Predictions

For several prediction tasks, the effect of gender was usu-
ally not significant. Gender bias was not present for pre-
dicting who would be rehospitalized within 2 years
(Stack et al., 1983) and for predicting suicide or compli-
ance with treatment (Lewis et al., 1990). Also, in many
studies, prognoses for male and female clients were not
significantly different (Adams & Betz, 1993; Bernstein &
Lecomte, 1982; Billingsley, 1977; Dailey, 1980; Fischer
et al., 1976; Foon, 1989; Lewis et al., 1990; Lépez et al.,
1993; Rabinowitz & Lukoff, 1995; Schwartz & Abra-
mowitz, 1975; Settin, 1982; Stearns et al., 1980; Wrobel,
1993; Zygmond & Denton, 1988). When the effect of
gender was significant, prognostic ratings were more
favorable for female clients than male clients, even though
clients were described by the same case histories except
for the designation of gender (Agell & Rothblum, 1991;
Fernbach et al., 1989; Hansen & Reekie, 1990; Teri,
1982).

Gender bias was present when clinicians predicted the
occurrence of violence. Estimates of the likelihood of
violent behavior were higher for male clients than for
female chents (Lewis et al., 1990; Lidz et al., 1993;

CLINICAL JUDGMENT - GARB

McNiel & Binder, 1995). In two of these studies (Lidz et
al., 1993; McNiel & Binder, 1995), predictions were
made by clinicians in the course of their clinical work. In
the Lidz et al. study, clinicians predicted violence more
often for men than for women (45% vs. 22%), but
women were more often violent than men (49% vs.
42%). Similarly, in the McNiel and Binder study, false
positives (patient is predicted to become violent but never
does) were more frequent for male patients, and false
negatives (patient is predicted to not become violent but
does) were more frequent for female patients.

Treatment Decisions
Children and Adolescents.
dence that gender bias occurs when clinicians make treat-

There is practically no evi-

ment decisions for children and adolescents. For example,
when recommendations were made by vocational guid-
ance counselors at high schools, the effect of student gen-
der was not statistically significant (Smith, 1974). In a
more recent study (Prout & Frederickson, 1991), school
psychologists made referrals for the treatment of high
school students with behavioral problems. They made
ratings on four 9-point rating scales: (a) importance of
referral for teacher consultation, (b) importance of refer-
ral for behavior modification plan, (c) importance of
referral for school-based counseling, and (d) importance
of referral to outside mental health professionals. The
difference between composite scores for males and
females was statistically significant but the magnitude of
the average difference was tiny: The average difference
between ratings for males and females was .35 (on a 9-
point rating scale). Finally, the effect of client gender was
not statistically significant when mental health profes-
sionals read case histories and rated the appropriateness of
hospitalization for adolescents who had attempted suicide
(Morrissey et al., 1995).

Similarly, when deciding if child abuse should be
reported, the effect of a child’s gender was not statistically
significant (Hampton & Newberger, 1985; Howe, Her-
zberger, & Tennen, 1988; Kalichman, Craig, & Follings-
tad, 1989; Kennel & Agresti, 1995; Zellman, 1992). For
example, Hampton and Newberger (1985) were able to
analyze data collected from 70 hospitals in 10 states. Hos-
pital personnel were given guidelines for recognizing
cases of child abuse. Their reports of cases of child abuse
were compared to lists of cases that were reported to child
protection services. Almost half of the cases that met the

414
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

study’s definition of abuse were not reported to a child
protection service. Failure to report could be predicted
by many factors, for example, social class, race, nature of
abuse, but could not be predicted by child’s gender.

Results on gender bias have not been replicated when
the task has been to make placement decisions. In field
studies on the appropriateness of placement decisions, the
effect of child gender has been nonsignificant (Clarizio &
Phillips, 1986), ratings have been more accurate for
female children than for male children (female children
in learning disability classrooms were more likely to have
a learning disability than male children in the learning
disability classrooms; Leinhardt et al., 1982), and rat-
ings have been more accurate for male children than
for female children (females without a learning disability
were more likely to be placed in a learning disability
classroom than were males without a learning disa~
bility; Payette & Clarizio, 1994). One of the studies
(Clarizio & Phillips, 1986) will be described. In this study,
data were collected on 525 children who were evaluated
for referral to a special education program. Children were
referred to the special education program if they were
diagnosed as having a learning disability. Of 235 children
who were diagnosed as having a learning disability, 184
were boys and 51 were girls. A diagnosis of learning
disability is supposed to be made if there is a marked
discrepancy between expected achievement and actual
achievement. The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children-Revised (WISC-R) and the Wide Range
Achievement Test (WRAT) were administered to all of
the children to measure expected achievement and actual
achievement, respectively. The discrepancy between
expected achievement and actual achievement did not
vary significantly by gender for children who were
referred to the special education program. Similarly, the
discrepancy between expected achievement and actual
achievement did not vary significantly by gender for the
children who were not referred to the special education
program. Thus, gender bias did not occur when children
were referred to a special education program.

Adults. Unlike decisions made for children and adoles-
cents, gender bias has occurred when clinicians have
made decisions about hospitalization for adults, at least
under some conditions. Decisions regarding psychiatric
hospitalization have not been affected by client gender
when decisions were made after clinicians read case his-

tories (Fernbach et al., 1989; Hansen & Reekie, 1990;
Hardy & Johnson, 1992; Lewis et al., 1990; Lowery &
Higgins, 1979; Murray & Abramson, 1983; Schwartz &
Abramowitz, 1975; Wrobel, 1993). However, gender bias
has been present when decisions were made by clinicians
in the course of their clinical work. For example, in one
study (Rosenfield, 1982), the effect of gender varied with
diagnostic category. When individuals were diagnosed as
having psychotic depression or neurosis, 66% of the males
and 43% of the females were hospitalized. When individ-
uals were diagnosed as having a personality disorder and/
or a substance-abuse disorder, 50% of the females and
only 18% of the males were hospitalized. The effect of
gender also varied by diagnostic category in another
study (Baskin, Sommers, Tessler, & Steadman, 1989).
Female prison inmates, but not male prison inmates, were
more likely to be placed in a mental health facility when
they were violent. Male inmates were more likely than
female inmates to be placed in a mental health facility
when the presenting complaint was depression. In a third
study (Rabinowitz et al., 1995), gender bias was not
observed when clinicians decided whether to hospitalize
individuals, but the effect of gender was not studied as a
function of diagnostic category. Gender bias was present
when clinicians decided whether someone should be
hospitalized on a locked or open ward: Males were more
likely to be referred to a locked ward.

The effect of gender was usually not significant for
other decisions related to psychiatric treatment. For
example, the effect of gender was generally not signifi-
cant when psychiatrists read case vignettes and decided
if clients should receive psychiatric treatment (Farmer &
Griffiths, 1992) or when they made recommendations for
electroconvulsive treatment (Lowery & Higgins, 1979;
Schwartz & Abramowitz, 1975) or treatment with psy-
chotropic medicine (Del Gaudio, Carpenter, & Morrow,
1978; Fernbach et al., 1989; Hansen & Reekie, 1990;
Lowery & Higgins, 1979; Murray & Abramson, 1983;
Oyster-Nelson & Cohen, 1981; Schwartz & Abramow-
itz, 1975; Stearns et al., 1980; Wrobel, 1993; but also see
Lewis et al., 1990; Stein, Del Gaudio, & Ansley, 1976).
When gender bias occurred, more medicine was recom-
mended for males in one study (Lewis et al., 1990) and
for females in a second study (Stein et al., 1976).

Similarly, the effect of gender was generally not sig-
nificant when clinicians made treatment decisions related
to psychotherapy. The effect of gender was not significant

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE + V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 112
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

when clinicians were to decide if clients could benefit
from psychotherapy (Adams & Betz, 1993; Agell &
Rothblum, 1991; Bernstein & LeComte, 1982; Hardy &
Johnson, 1992; Oyster-Nelson & Cohen, 1981; Rabi-
nowitz & Lukoff, 1995; Settin, 1982; Stearns et al., 1980).
Regarding the type of therapy that was recommended by
clinicians (e.g., individual, group, or family therapy;
short-term or long-term therapy; directive or nondirec-
tive therapy; supportive, behavioral, cognitive-behavioral,
or insight-oriented therapy), the effect of gender was usu-
ally not significant (Agell & Rothblum, 1991; Bern-
stein & LeComte, 1982; Dailey, 1980; Hansen & Reekie,
1990; Hecker et al., 1995; Lewis et al., 1990; Lowery &
Higgins, 1979; Murray & Abramson, 1983; Oyster-
Nelson & Cohen, 1981; Rabinowitz & Lukoff, 1995;
Schwartz & Abramowitz, 1975; Stearns et al., 1980;
Wrobel, 1993; but see Bowman, 1982; Fernbach et al.,
1989; Fischer et al., 1976; Hardy & Johnson, 1992). Also,
the effect of gender was frequently not significant when
clinicians formulated goals for psychotherapy (Austad &
Aronson, 1987; Billingsley, 1977; Dailey, 1980; Fischer et
al., 1976; Garfinkle & Morin, 1978; McCollum & Rus-
sell, 1992; but see Bowman, 1982; Miller, 1974). Finally,
though the effect of gender was generally not significant
when clinicians made treatment decisions regarding psy~
chotherapy, one exception can be described: Clinicians
who conducted intake interviews with clients often
referred them to clinicians of the same sex (Schover,
1981; Shullman & Betz, 1979).

Results are mixed on gender bias and the referral of
adult psychotherapy clients to vocational counseling. In
one study (Fernbach et al., 1989), referrals to vocational
counseling did not vary by client gender (also see Buczek,
1981). However, in another study (Lowery & Higgins,
1979), psychologists, but not social workers or psychia-
trists, were more likely to refer same-sex clients than
opposite-sex clients to vocational counseling,

Though gender bias may generally be absent when cli-
nicians make decisions regarding psychotherapy, one can
speculate about when gender bias is most likely to occur.
When a diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is
given more often to male clients than female clients, the
female clients may more often be seen in individual ther-
apy and the male clients may more often be seen in group
therapy (Fernbach et al., 1989). When setting goals for
psychotherapy, the goal of balancing vocational and
domestic roles may be judged to be more important for

CLINICAL JUDGMENT + GARB

females than males (Bowman, 1982; also s : Sesan,
1988). Clinicians may be more likely to refer a psycho-
therapy client to vocational counseling if the client is the
same gender as the clinician (Lowery & Higgins, 1979).
Finally, when assigning clients to therapists, clients are
likely to be assigned to therapists of the same sex
(Schover, 1981; Shullman & Betz, 1979). Other instances
of gender bias will undoubtedly be found in the future,
but they are not apparent now.

DISCUSSION
For many important tasks, bias related to the collection
and/or integration of information does not seem to be
present or, if present, seems to be in a direction that favors
groups that have historically been discriminated against.
For example, contrary to conventional wisdom, when
clinictans have made diagnoses and ratings of level of
adjustment, the results have not indicated that there is (a)
a bias to judge lower-class patients as being more seriously
disturbed than upper-class patients or (b) a bias to judge
female patients as being more disturbed than male
patients. Regarding the referral of children to special edu-
cation programs, race bias and gender bias seem to be
absent, and the occurrence of social class bias was in a
direction opposite from what most psychologists would
expect: Middle-class children were referred more often
than lower-class children. Similarly, though African
Americans are overrepresented among adults hospitalized
in, and committed to, public psychiatric hospitals (Lind-
sey & Paul, 1989), research indicates that clinicians are
not biased against Blacks when they decide whether to
hospitalize and/or commit patients (e.g., Lindsey et al.,
1989). Also, race bias and gender bias were generally
absent when clinicians made decisions about psychother-
apy, though instances of bias may at times occur. Finally,
though psychotropic medicine is prescribed about twice
as often for females than for males (Ashton, 1991),
research indicates that gender bias rarely occurs when
psychiatrists prescribe medicine, and when it does occur,
males are as likely as females to receive more medicine.
For other important tasks, bias is present. For example,
misdiagnoses of schizophrenia occur more often for Black
and Hispanic patients than for White patients when the
patients have psychotic affective disorders. Another well-
replicated finding is that diagnoses of antisocial personal-
ity disorder are more likely to be made for males than
females while diagnoses of histrionic personality disorder
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

are more likely to be made for females than males, even
when males and females are described by the same case
histories. Another important finding is that referrals for
psychotherapy were more often made for middle-class
clients than for lower-class clients. Also, when both
middle-class and lower-class clients were referred for psy-
chotherapy, middle-class clients were more often recom-
mended for insight-oriented psychotherapy and lower-
class clients were more often recommended for support-
ive psychotherapy. As another example of bias, antipsy-
chotic medications were more often prescribed for Black
patients than for other patients even when the Black
patients were not more psychotic, and affective symptoms
in severely mentally ill patients were more often under-
treated when patients were Black or Hispanic compared
to when they were White.

Limitations of the research on race bias, social class
bias, and gender bias can be described. For example, for
many important tasks, the occurrence of bias has not been
studied. Race bias, social class bias, and gender bias have
not been studied for tasks in the area of neuropsychologi-
cal assessment (Garb & Schramke, 1996). Another task
that has been neglected is case formulation (but see Abra-
mowitz, 1977; Buczek, 1981). Though clinicians have
been instructed to make ratings of personality traits, they
rarely made ratings of motives, attitudes, and defense
mechanisms, and they were not asked to describe the
causes of a client’s behaviors and symptoms. Another lim~
itation of this review is that results were only presented
when level of psychopathology was controlled for.
Results can be interesting even when level of psychopa-
thology is not controlled for (e.g., Lewis, Shanok,
Cohen, Kligfeld, & Frisone, 1980). Also, results on sex-
role bias are interesting, for example, whether judgments
vary for men with stereotypic masculine or feminine
traits (Robertson & Fitzgerald, 1990), but these results
also lie outside of the scope of this review.

Another limitation of the research is that an analogue
paradigm was frequently used to study bias. That is,
instead of analyzing judgments made by clinicians in the
course of their clinical work, in analogue studies judg-
ments were made by clinicians after reading case histories
or watching videotapes. Davidson and Abramowitz
(1980) had called for a moratorium on analogue studies,
in part because they found that bias was not reported in
the analogue studies they reviewed. They believed that
in an analogue study, clinicians could discern the purpose

of the study, and that they would make socially desirable
judgments. However, well-replicated biases have been
found using the analogue method, for example, gender
bias in the differential diagnosis of histrionic personality
disorder and antisocial personality disorder, social class
bias in the referral of clients for psychotherapy (additional
biases described by investigators using the analogue
method, e.g., age bias, diagnostic overshadowing, are
described by Lépez, 1989).

Recommendations can be made for decreasing bias.
First, clinicians should be sensitive to biases that have
been reported in the clinical judgment literature. For
example, psychiatrists need to make sure that they ade-
quately treat affective symptoms in African-American and
Hispanic patients with psychotic affective disorders, and
they need to make sure that they do not overmedicate
African-American patients with neuroleptic medicine.
Segal et al. (1996) reported that when psychiatrists spent
as much time with African-American patients as they did
with other patients, they were less likely to overmedicate
the Black patients. However, one should not assume that
one can always decrease bias by spending more time with
patients or by collecting increasing amounts of assessment
information (Ambady & Rosenthal, 1992; Garb, 1984).
Regarding psychotherapy, perhaps the most important
recommendation is that lower-class patients not be
excluded from treatment simply because of their socio-
economic background.

Bias can also be decreased by attending to diagnostic
criteria. For example, one can expect that race bias will
not be present for the differential diagnosis of schizophre-
nia and bipolar affective disorder when clinicians attend
strictly to diagnostic criteria. Unfortunately, empirical
evidence indicates that clinicians frequently do not attend
to diagnostic criteria (Widiger & Trull, 1991). Instead,
the representativeness heuristic seems to be descriptive of
how many clinicians make diagnoses (Garb, 1996). For
example, when making a diagnosis of schizophrenia, cli-
nicians seem to compare patients to their idea of the typi-
cal patient with schizophrenia, and they assign the
diagnosis if there is a close fit.

Biases can also be reduced by the use of statistical pre-
diction rules (e.g, Dawes, Faust, & Meehl, 1989;
Kleinmuntz, 1990; Meehl, 1954). The development of
statistical prediction rules for predicting the occurrence
of violence has been especially impressive (e.g., Gardner,
Lidz, Mulvey, & Shaw, 1996). Assuming that race, social

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE - V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 114
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

class, and gender would be entered into a statistical pre-
diction rule only if it leads to more valid predictions, one
would expect that statistical predictions will not be
biased. Unfortunately, statistical prediction rules are not
as impressive for making diagnoses or describing person-
ality traits and psychiatric symptoms as they are for pre-
dicting behavior (Garb, 1994).

REFERENCES

Abramowitz, C. V. (1977). Blaming the mother: An experi-
mental investigation of sex-role bias in countertransference.
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 2, 24-34.

Abramowitz, C. V., & Dokecki, PR R. (1977). The politics of
clinical judgment: Early empirical returns. Psychological Bulle-
tin, 84, 460-476.

Abramowitz, S. 1., Abramowitz, C. V., Jackson, C., & Gomes,
B. (1973). The politics of clinical judgment: What nonlib-
eral examiners infer about women who do not stifle them-
selves. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 41,
385-391.

Abramowitz, S. I., & Herrera, H. R. (1981). On controlling for
patient psychopathology in naturalistic studies of sex bias:
A methodological demonstration. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 49, 597-603.

Adams, E.M., & Betz, N. E. (1993). Gender differences in
counselors’ attitudes toward and attributions about incest.
Joumal of Counseling Psychology, 40, 210-216.

Adebimpe, V. R. (1981), Overview: White norms and psychi-
atric diagnosis of Black patients. American Journal of Psychiatry,

138, 279-285.

Adler, D. A., Drake, R. E., & Teague, G. B. (1990). Clinicians”
practices in personality assessment: Does gender influence
the use of DSM-III Axis II? Comprehensive Psychiatry, 31,
125~133.

Agell, G., & Rothblum, E. D. (1991). Effects of clients’ obesity
and gender on the therapy judgments of psychologists. Pro-
Sessional Psychology: Research and Practice, 22, 223-229.

Ambady, N., & Rosenthal, R. (1992). Thin slices of expressive
behavior as predictors of interpersonal consequences: A
meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 256-274.

Amira, S., Abramowitz, S. I., 8& Gomes-Schwartz, B. (1977).
Socially-charged pupil and psychologist effects on psycho-
educational decisions. Journal of Special Education, 11,
433-440.

Ashton, H. (1991). Psychotropic-drug prescribing for women.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 158(Suppl. 10), 30-35.

Austad, C. $., & Aronson, H. (1987). The salience of sex role
instructions to mental health professionals. Sex Roles, 16,
323-333.

Bamgbose, O., Edwards, D., & Johnson, S. (1980). The effects

CLINICAL JUDGMENT - GARB

of race and social class on clinical judgment. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 36, 605-609.

Baskin, D.R., Sommers, I, Tessler, R., & Steadman, H. J.
(1989). Role incongruence and gender variation in the pro-
vision of prison mental health services. Journal of Health and
Social Behavior, 30, 305-314.

Becker, D., & Lamb, S. (1994). Sex bias in the diagnosis of
borderline personality disorder and posttraumatic stress dis-
order. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 25, 55-61.

Benefee, L. M., Abramowitz, S.1., Weitz, L.J., & Armstrong,
S. H. (1976). Effects of patient racial attribution on Black
clinicians’ inferences. American Journal of Community Psychol-
ogy, 4, 263-273.

Bemard, R., & Clarizio, H. (1981). Socioeconomic bias in spe-
cial education placement decisions. Psychology in the Schools,
18, 178-183.

Bernstein, B. L., & LeComte, C. (1982). Therapist expectan-
cies: Client gender and therapist gender, profession, and
level of training. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 38, 744-754.

Billingsley, D. (1977). Sex bias in psychotherapy: An examina-
tion of the effects of client sex, client pathology, and thera-
pist sex on treatment planning. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 45, 250-256.

Blake, W. (1973). The influence of race on diagnosis. Smith Col-
lege Studies in Social Work, 43, 184~192.

Bloch, P. M., Weitz, L. J., & Abramowitz, S. I. (1980). Racial
attribution effects on clinical judgment: A failure to replicate
among White clinicians. American Journal of Community Psy-
chology, 8, 485-493.

Bowman, P. R. (1982). An analog study with beginning thera-
pists suggesting bias against “activity” in women. Psychother-
apy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 19, 318-324.

Briar, S. (1961). Use of theory in studying effects of client social
class on students’ judgments. Social Work, 6, 91-97.

Broverman, I., Broverman, D., Clarkson, F, Rosenkrantz, P, &
Vogel, S. (1970). Sex-role stereotypes and clinical judgments
of mental health. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
34, 1-7.

Buczek, T. A. (1981). Sex biases in counseling: Counselor
retention of the concerns of a female and male client. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 28, 13-21.

Clarizio, H. F., & Phillips, $. E. (1986). Sex bias in the diagnosis
of learning disabled students. Psychology in the Schools, 23,
44-52.

Coleman, D., & Baker, FM. (1994). Misdiagnosis of schizo-
phrenia in older, black veterans. Hospital and Community Psy-
chiatry, 45, 527-528.

Cooper, R. B, & Werner, P. D. (1990), Predicting violence in
newly admitted inmates: A lens model analysis of staff deci-
sion making. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 17, 431-447.

Corbitt, E. M., & Widiger, T. A. (1995). Sex differences among

415
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

the personality disorders: An exploration of the data. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 2, 225-238.

Dailey, D. M. (1980). Are social workers sexist? A replication.
Social Work, 25, 46-50.

Davidson, C. V., & Abramowitz, S. I. (1980). Sex bias in clini-
cal judgment: Later empirical returns. Psychology of Women
Quarterly, 4, 377-395.

Dawes, R. M., Faust, D., & Meehl, PE. (1989). Clinical versus
actuarial judgment. Science, 243, 1668-1674.

Del Gaudio, A. C., Carpenter, P. J., & Morrow, G. R. (1978).
Male and female treatment differences: Can they be general-
ized? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 46, 1577—
1578.

DiNardo, P. A. (1975). Social class and diagnostic suggestion as
variables in clinical judgment. Journal of Consulting and Clini-
cal Psychology, 43, 363-368.

Dowds, B. N., Fontana, A. F, Russakoff, L. M., & Harris, M.
(1977). Cognitive mediators between patients’ social class
and therapists’ evaluations. Archives of General Psychiatry, 34,
917-920.

Elk, R., Dickman, B. J., & Teggin, A. F. (1986). Depression in
schizophrenia: A study of prevalence and treatment. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 228-229.

Farmer, A. E., & Griffiths, H. (1992). Labelling and illness in
primary care: Comparing factors influencing general prac-
titioners’ and psychiatrists’ decisions regarding patient refer-
ral to mental illness services. Psychological Medicine, 22,
717-723.

Feinblatt, J. A., & Gold, A. R. (1976). Sex roles and the psychi-
atric referral process. Sex Roles, 2, 109-122.

Fernbach, B. E., Winstead, B. A., & Derlega, V. J. (1989). Sex
differences in diagnosis and treatment recommendations for
antisocial personality and somatization disorders. Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology, 8, 238-255.

Fischer, J., Dulaney, D. D., Fazio, R.T., Hudak, M.T., &
Zivotofky, E. (1976). Are social workers sexists? Social Work,
21, 428-433.

Foon, A. E. (1989). Mediators of clinical judgment: An explo-
ration of the effect of therapists’ locus of control on clinical
expectations. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Mono-
graphs, 115, 245-266.

Ford, M. R., & Widiger, T. A. (1989). Sex bias in the diagnosis
of histrionic and antisocial personality disorders. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 301-305.

Frame, R. E., Clanizio, H. F, Porter, A., & Vinsonhaler, J. R.
(1982). Interclinician agreement and bias in school psychol-
ogists’ diagnostic and treatment recommendations for a
learning disabled child. Psychology in the Schools, 19,
319-327.

Franklin, D. L. (1985). Differential clinical assessments: The
influence of class and race. Social Service Review, 59, 44-61.

Fuller, A. K., & Blashfield, R. K. (1989). Masochistic personal-
ity disorder: A prototype analysis of diagnosis and sex bias.
Journal of Nervous and Menta! Disease, 177, 168-172.

Funtowicz, M. N., & Widiger, T. A. (1995). Sex bias in the
diagnosis of personality disorders: A different approach. Jour-
ttal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 17, 145-165.

Garb, H. N. (1984). The incremental validity of information
used in personality assessment. Clinical Psychology Review, 4,
641-655.

Garb, H. N. (1989). Clinical judgment, clinical training, and
professional experience. Psychological Bulletin, 105, 387-
396.

Garb, H. N. (1994). Toward a second generation of statistical
prediction rules in psychodiagnosis and personality assess-
ment. Computers in Human Behavior, 10, 377-394.

Garb, H. N. (1995). Sex bias and the diagnosis of borderline
personality disorder. Professional Psychology: Research and Prac-
tice, 26, 526.

Garb, H. N. (1996). The representativeness and past-behavior
heuristics in clinical judgment. Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 27, 272-277.

Garb, H. N., & Schramke, C. J. (1996). Judgment research and
neuropsychological assessment: A narrative review and
meta-analyses. Psychological Bulletin, 120, 140-153.

Gardner, W., Lidz, C. W., Mulvey, E. P., & Shaw, E. C. (1996).
A comparison of actuarial methods for identifying repeti-
tively violent patients with mental illnesses. Law and Human
Behavior, 20, 35-48.

Garfinkle, E. M., & Morin, S. F. (1978). Psychologists’ attitudes
toward homosexual psychotherapy clients. Journal of Social
Issues, 34, 101-112.

Geller, J. D. (1988). Racial bias in the evaluation of patients for
psychotherapy. In L. Comas-Diaz & E. E. H. Griffith (Eds.),
Clinical guidelines in cross-cultural mental health (pp. 112-134).
New York: Wiley.

Haase, W. (1964). The role of socioeconomic class in examiner
bias. In F. Riessman, J. Cohen, & A. Pearl (Eds.), Mental
health of the poor (pp. 241-247). New York: Free Press.

Hamilton, S., Rothbart, M., & Dawes, R. M. (1986). Sex bias,
diagnosis, and DSM-III. Sex Roles, 15, 269-274.

Hampton, R. L., & Newberger, E. H. (1985). Child abuse inci-
dence and reporting by hospitals: Significance of severity,
class, and race. American Journal of Public Health, 75, 56~
60.

Hansen, F.J., & Reekie, L. (1990). Sex differences in clinical
judgments of male and female therapists. Sex Roles, 23,
51-64.

Hardy, D. M., & Johnson, M. E. (1992). Influence of therapist
gender and client gender, socioeconomic status and alco-
holic status on clinical judgments. Journal of Akohol and Drug
Education, 37, 94-102.

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE + V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 416
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Haverkamp, B. E. (1993). Confirmatory bias in hypothesis rest~
ing for client-identified and counselor self-generated
hypotheses. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 40, 303-315.

Hayes, K.E., & Wolleat, PL. (1978). Effects of sex in judg-
ments of a simulated counseling interview. Journal of Counsel-
ing Psychology, 25, 164-168.

Hecker, L. L., Trepper, T. S., Wetchler, J. L., & Fontaine, K. L.
(1995). The influence of therapist values, religiosity and
gender in the initial assessment of sexual addiction by family
therapists. The American Journal of Family Therapy, 23,
261-272.

Henry, K. A., & Cohen, C. 1. (1983). The role of labeling pro-
cesses in diagnosing borderline personality disorder. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 140, 1527-1529.

Hollingshead, A. B., & Redlich, FC. (1958). Social class and
mental illness: A community study, New York: Wiley.

Howe, A. C., Herzberger, §., & Tennen, H. (1988). The influ-
ence of personal history of abuse and gender on clinicians’
judgments of child abuse. Journal of Family Violence, 3,
105-119.

Huebner, E.S., & Cummings, J. A. (1986). Influence of race
and test data ambiguity upon school psychologists’ deci-
sions. School Psychology Review, 15, 410-417.

Jenkins-Hall, K., & Sacco, W. P. (1991). Effect of client race
and depression on evaluations by white therapists. Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology, 10, 322-333.

Jones, B.E., & Gray, B. A. (1986). Problems in diagnosing
schizophrenia and affective disorders among blacks. Hospi-
tal & Community Psychiatry, 37, 61-65.

Kalichman, §.C., Craig, M. E., & Follingstad, D. R. (1989).
Factors influencing the reporting of father-child sexual
abuse: Study of licensed practicing psychologists. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 20, 84-89.

Kennel, R. G., & Agresti, A. A. (1995). Effects of gender and
age on psychologists’ reporting of child sexual abuse. Profes-
sional Psychology: Research and Practice, 26, 612~615.

Kirshner, L. A., & Johnston, L. (1983). Effects of gender on
inpatient psychiatric hospitalization. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 171, 651-657.

Kleinmuntz, B. (1990). Why we still use our heads instead of
the formulas: Toward an integrative approach. Psychological
Bulletin, 107, 296-310.

Koscherak, S., & Masling, J. (1972). Noblesse oblige effect: The
interpretation of Rorschach responses as a function of
ascribed social class. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 39, 415-419.

Kurtz, N., Kurtz, R., & Hoffnung, R. (1970). Attitudes toward
the lower- and middle-class psychiatric patient as a function
of authoritarianism among mental health students. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 35, 338-341.

Lee, S. D., & Temerlin, M. K. (1970). Social class, diagnosis,

CLINICAL JUDGMENT + GARB

and prognosis for psychotherapy. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, and Practice, 7, 181-185.

Leinhardt, G., Seewald, A. M., & Zigmond, N. (1982). Sex and
race differences in learning disabilities classrooms. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 74, 835-843.

Levy, M., & Kahn, M. (1970). Interpreter bias on the Ror-
schach test as a function of patients’ socioeconomic status.
Journal of Projective Techniques and Personality Assessment, 34,
106-112.

Lewis, D. O., Shanok, S. S., Cohen, R. J., Kligfeld, M., & Fri-
sone, G. (1980). Race bias in the diagnosis and disposition
of violent adolescents. American Journal of Psychiatry, 137,
1211-1216.

Lewis, G., Croft-Jeffreys, C., & David, A. (1990). Are British
psychiatrists racist? British Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 410-415.

Lidz, C. W., Mulvey, E. P., & Gardner, W. (1993). The accuracy
of predictions of violence to others. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 269, 1007-1011.

Lindsay, K. A., & Widiger, T. A. (1995). Sex and gender bias in
self-report personality disorder inventories: Item analyses of
the MCMI-II, MMPI, and PDQ-R. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 65, 1-20.

Lindsey, K. P., & Paul, G. L. (1989). Involuntary commitments
to public mental institutions: Issues involving the overrepre-
sentation of blacks and assessment of relevant functioning.
Psychological Bulletin, 106, 171-183.

Lindsey, K. P., Paul, G. L., & Mariotto, M.J. (1989). Urban
psychiatric commitments: Disability and dangerous behavior
of black and white recent admissions. Hospital and Commu-
nity Psychiatry, 40, 286-294.

Li-Repac, D. (1980). Cultural influences on clinical perception:
A comparison between Caucasian and Chinese-American
therapists. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 11, 327~342.

Littlewood, R. (1992). Psychiatric diagnosis and racial bias:
Empirical and interpretive approaches. Social Science and
Medicine, 34, 141-149.

Lépez, S. R. (1989). Patient variable biases in clinical judgment:
Conceptual overview and methodological considerations.
Psychological Bulletin, 106, 184~203.

Lopez, S.R., Smith, A., Wolkenstein, B. H., & Charlin, V.
(1993). Gender bias in clinical judgment: An assessment of
the analogue method’s transparency and social desirability.
Sex Roles, 28, 35-45, .

Loring, M., & Powell, B. (1988). Gender, race, and DSM-III:
A study of the objectivity of psychiatric diagnostic behavior.

Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 29, 1-22.

Lowery, C.R., & Higgins, R. L. (1979). Analogue investiga-
tion of the relationship between clients’ sex and treatment
recommendations. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 47, 792-794.

Luepnitz, R.R., Randolph, D.L., & Gutsch, K. U. (1982).

417
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Race and socioeconomic status as confounding variables in
the accurate diagnosis of alcoholism. Journal of Clinical Psy-
chology, 38, 665-669.

Matuszek, P., & Oakland, T. (1979). Factors influencing teach-
ers’ and psychologists’ recommendations regarding special
class placement. Journal of School Psychology, 17, 116-125.

McCollum, E. E., & Russell, C. 8. (1992). Mother-blaming in
family therapy: An empirical investigation. The American
Journal of Family Therapy, 20, 71-76.

McLaughlin, M., & Balch, P. (1980). Effects of client-therapist
ethnic homophily on therapists’ judgments. American Journal
of Community Psychology, 8, 243-252.

MeNiel, D. E., & Binder, R. L. (1995). Correlates of accuracy
in the assessment of psychiatric inpatients’ risk of violence.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 901-906. .

Meehl, P. E. (1954). Clinical versus statistical prediction: A theoretical
analysis and a review of the evidence. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.

Merluzzi, B. H., & Merluzzi, T. V. (1978). Influence of client
race on counselors’ assessment of case materials. Jowrnal of
Counseling Psychology, 25, 399-404.

Miller, D. (1974). The influence of the patient's sex on clinical
judgment. Smith College Studies in Social Work, 44, 89-100.

Morrissey, R.F, Dicker, R., Abikoff, H., Alvir, J.M.J.,
DeMarco, A., & Koplewicz, H. S. (1995). Hospitalizing the
suicidal adolescent: An empirical investigation of decision-
making criteria. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 34, 902-911.

Mukherjee, S., Shukla, S., Woodle, J., Rosen, A. M., & Olarte,
S. (1983). Misdiagnosis of schizophrenia in bipolar patients:
A multiethnic comparison. American Journal of Psychiatry,
140, 1571-1574.

Murray, J., & Abramson, P. R. (1983). An investigation of the
effects of client gender and attractiveness on psychothera-
pists’ judgments. In J. Murray & P. R. Abramson (Eds.), Bias
in psychotherapy (pp. 129-167). Los Angeles: University of
California Press.

Nalven, F. B., Hofman, L.J., & Bierbryer, B. (1969). The
effects of subjects’ age, sex, race, and socioeconomic status
on psychologists’ estimates of “true 1Q” from WISC scores.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 25, 271-274.

Neer, W.L., Foster, D. A., Jones, J.G., & Reynolds, D. A.
(1973). Socioeconomic bias in the diagnosis of mental retar-
dation. Exceptional Children, 40, 38-39.

Neisser, U., Boodoo, G., Bouchard, T.J., Jr, Boykin, A. W.,
Brody, N., Ceci, S. J., Halpern, D. F, Loehlin, J. C., Perloff,
R., Sternberg, R.J., & Urbina, S. (1996). Intelligence:
Knowns and unknowns. American Psychologist, 51, 77-101.

Neumann, M., Salganik, I., Rabinowitz, S., Bauer, A., & Kas-
tner, M. (1990). The effect of diagnosis and educational level

on therapists’ treatment decisions in a regional psychiatric
outpatient clinic. Israeli Journal of Psychiatry and Related Sci-
ences, 27, 199-204.

Oyster-Nelson, C. K., & Cohen, L. H. (1981). The extent of
sex bias in clinical treatment recommendations. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 12, 508-515.

Pavkov, T. W., Lewis, D. A., & Lyons, J. S. (1989). Psychiatric
diagnoses and racial bias: An empirical investigation. Profes-
sional Psychology: Research and Practice, 20, 364-368.

Payette, K. A., & Clarizio, H. F. (1994). Discrepant team deci-
sions: The effects of race, gender, achievement, and IQ on
LD eligibility. Psychology in the Schools, 31, 40—48.

Potts, M. K., Burnam, M. A., & Wells, K. B. (1991). Gender
differences in depression detection: A comparison of clini-
cian diagnosis and standardized assessment. Psychological
Assessment, 3, 609-615.

Prout, H. T., & Frederickson, A. K. (1991). Sex bias in clinical
judgment among school psychologists. Psychology in the
Schools, 28, 226-229.

PsycLIT [Database]. (1974-June, 1996). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association [Producer]. Available
from: Ovid Technologies.

Rabinowitz, J., & Lukoff, |. (1995). Clinical decision making
of short- versus long-term treatment. Research on Social Work
Practice, 5, 62-79.

Rabinowitz, J., Massad, A., & Fennig, S. (1995). Factors influ-
encing disposition decisions for patients seen in a psychiatric
emergency service. Psychiatric Services, 46, 712-718.

Ridley, C. R. (1986). Diagnosis as a function of race-pairing
and client self-disclosure. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology,
17, 337-351.

Robertson, J., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (1990). The (mis)treatment of
men: Effects of client gender role and life-style on diagnosis
and attribution of pathology. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
37, 3-9.

Rosenfield, §. (1982). Sex roles and societal reactions to mental
illness: The labeling of “deviant” deviance. Journal of Health
and Social Behavior, 23, 18-24.

Routh, D. K., & King, K. M. (1972). Social class bias in clinical
judgment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 38,
202-207.

Rowden, D. W.,, Michel, J. B., Dillehay, R.C., & Martin,
H. W. (1970). Judgments about candidates for psychother-
apy: The influence of social class and insight-verbal ability.
Joumal of Health and Social Behavior, 11, 51-58,

Sattler, J.M., & Kuncik, T.M. (1976). Ethnicity, sociceco-
nomic status, and pattern of WISC scores as variables that
affect psychologists’ estimates of “effective intelligence.”
Joumal of Clinical Psychology, 32, 362-366.

Schover, L. R. (1981). Male and female therapists’ responses to

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE + V4 N2, SUMMER 1997 118
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

male and female client sexual material: An analogue study.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 10, 477-492.

Schwartz, J.M., & Abramowitz, S.I. (1975). Value-related
effects on psychiatric judgment. Archives of General Psychiatry,
32, 1525-1529.

Segal, S. P., Bola, J. R., & Watson, M. A. (1996). Race, quality
of care, and antipsychotic prescribing practices in psychiatric
emergency services. Psychiatric Services, 47, 282-286.

Seligman, M. R. (1968). The interracial casework relationship.
Smith College Studies in Social Work, 39, 84.

Sesan, R. (1988). Sex bias and sex-role stereotyping in psycho-
therapy with women: Survey results. Psychotherapy, 25,
107-116.

Settin, J. M. (1982). Clinical judgment in geropsychology prac-
tice. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 19,
397-404,

Settin, J. M., & Bramel, D. (1981). Interaction of client class
and gender in biasing clinical judgment. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 51, 510-520.

Shullman, S. L., & Betz, N. E. (1979). An investigation of the
effects of client sex and presenting problem in referral from
intake. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 26, 140-145.

Simon, R.J., Fleiss, J.L., Gurland, B.J., Stiller, PR., &
Sharpe, L. (1973). Depression and schizophrenia in hospital-
ized black and white mental patients. Archives of General Psy-
chiatry, 28, 509-512.

Sleek, S. (1996, April). Ensuring accuracy in clinical decisions.
The APA Monitor, 26, 30.

Smith, M. L. (1974). Influence of client sex and ethnic group
on counselor judgments. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
21, 516-521.

Smith, M. L. (1980). Sex bias in counseling and psychotherapy.
Psychological Bulletin, 87, 392-407.

Stack, L. C., Lannon, P. B., & Miley, A.D. (1983). Accuracy
of clinicians’ expectancies for psychiatric rehospitalization.
American Journal of Community Psychology, 11, 99-113.

Stearns, B. C., Penner, L. A., & Kimmel, E. (1980). Sexism
among psychotherapists: A case not yet proven. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 48, 548-550.

Stein, L.S., Del Gaudio, A. C., & Ansley, M. Y. (1976). A
comparison of female and male neurotic depressives. Journal
of Clinical Psychology, 32, 19-21.

Sternberg, R.J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of human
intelligence. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Stevens, G. (1981). Bias in the attribution of hyperkinetic
behavior as a function of ethnic identification and socioeco-
nomic status. Psychology in the Schools, 18, 99-106.

Stricker, G. (1977). Implications of research for psychothera-
peutic treatment of women. American Psychologist, 32,
14-22,

CLINICAL JUDGMENT - GARB

Strickland, T. L., Jenkins, J. O., Myers, H. F, & Adams, H. E.
(1988). Diagnostic judgments as a function of client and
therapist race. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assess-
ment, 10, 141-151.

Sutton, R. G., & Kessler, M. (1986). National study of the
effects of clients’ socioeconomic status on clinical psycholo-
gists’ professional judgments. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 54, 275-276.

Teri, L. (1982). Effects of sex and sex-role style on clinical judg-
ment. Sex Roles, 8, 639-649.

Tomlinson-Clarke, S., & Cheatham, H. E. (1993). Counselor
and client ethnicity and counselor intake judgments. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 40, 267-270.

Trachtman, J. P. (1971). Socio-economic class bias in Rorschach
diagnosis: Contributing psychological attributes of the clini-
cian. Journal of Projective Techniques and Personality Assessment,
35, 229-240.

Tseng, W., McDermott, J. F, Ogino, K., & Ebata, K. (1982).
Cross-cultural differences in parent-child assessment: U.S.A.
and Japan. International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 28,
305-317.

Umbenhauer, $. L., & DeWitte, L. L. (1978). Patient race and
social class: Attitudes and decisions among three groups of
mental health professionals. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 19,
509-515.

Vail, S. (1970). The effects of socioeconomic class, race, and
level of experience on social workers’ judgments of clients.
Smith College Studies in Social Work, 40, 236-246.

Warner, R. (1978). The diagnosis of antisocial and hysterical
personality disorders: An example of sex bias. Journal of Ner-
vous and Mental Disease, 166, 839-845.

Warner, R. (1979). Racial and sexual bias in psychiatric diagno-
sis. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 167, 303-310.

Widiger, T. A., & Settle, S. A. (1987). Broverman et al. revis-
ited: An artifactual sex bias. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 53, 463-469.

Widiger, T. A., & Spitzer, R. L. (1991), Sex bias in the diagnosis
of personality disorders: Conceptual and methodological
issues. Clinical Psychology Review, 11, 1-22.

Widiger, T.A., & Trull, T.J. (1991). Diagnosis and clinical
assessment. Annual Review of Psychology, 42, 109-133.

Wing, J. K., Cooper, J. E., & Sartorius, N. (1974). Measurement
and classifation of psychiatric symptoms. An instructional manual
Jor the PSE and CATEGO program. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Wright, J. A., & Hutton, B.O. (1977). Influence of client
socioeconomic status on selected behaviors, attitudes, and
decisions of counselors. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 24,
527-530.

Wrobel, N. H. (1993). Effect of patient age and gender on clin-

119
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ical decisions. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
24, 206-212.

Wyatt, G.E., Powell, G.J., & Bass, B. A. (1982). The survey
of Afro-American behavior: Its development and use in
research. In B. A. Bass, G. E. Wyatt, & G. J. Powell (Eds.),
The Afro-American family: Assessment, treatment, and research
issues (pp. 13-33). New York: Grune & Stratton.

Zellman, G. L. (1992). The impact of case characteristics on

child abuse reporting decisions. Child Abuse and Neglect, 16,
57-74.

Zygmond, M. J., & Denton, W. (1988). Gender bias in marital
therapy: A multidimensional scaling analysis. The American
Joumal of Family Therapy, 16, 262-272.

Received May 9, 1996; accepted July 25, 1996.

CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: SCIENCE AND PRACTICE - V4 N2, SUAAMER 1997 120
