 

HEINONLINE

DATE DOWNLOADED: Tue Nov 22 07:56:22 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Pat Whitehouse, Race, Bias and Social Enquiry Reports, 30 PROB. J. 43 (1983).

ALWD 7th ed.
Pat Whitehouse, Race, Bias and Social Enquiry Reports, 30 Prob. J. 43 (1983).

APA 7th ed.
Whitehouse, P. (1983). Race, bias and social enquiry reports. Probation Journal,
30(2), 43-49.

Chicago 17th ed.
Pat Whitehouse, "Race, Bias and Social Enquiry Reports," Probation Journal 30, no. 2
(June 1983): 43-49

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Pat Whitehouse, "Race, Bias and Social Enquiry Reports" (1983) 30:2 Prob J 43.

AGLC 4th ed.
Pat Whitehouse, 'Race, Bias and Social Enquiry Reports’ (1983) 30(2) Probation
Journal 43

MLA 9th ed.
Whitehouse, Pat. "Race, Bias and Social Enquiry Reports.” Probation Journal, vol. 30,
no. 2, June 1983, pp. 43-49. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Pat Whitehouse, ‘Race, Bias and Social Enquiry Reports’ (1983) 30 Prob J 43

Provided by:
Younes & Soraya Nazarian Library, University of Haifa

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline’s Terms and
Conditions of the license agreement available at
htips.//heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

-- To obtain permission to use this article beyond the scope of your license, please use:

Copyright Information
Race, Bias and Social Enquiry Reports

 

Pat Whitehouse

Senior Probation Officer, Birmingham

In the quest for equal justice for black people in the criminal
process, the author identifies how black defendants suffer
cumulative racial disadvantage, significantly because of the
white values, subtle racism and unintended consequences of
court reports, and provides illuminating and mortifying examples.

Considerable interest has been gener-
ated within the Probation Service over
recent years about the number of black
offenders in prison service establishments,
and it is clear from statistical data
collated in the West Midlands County
Service and elsewhere, that black people
are certainly unequally distributed over
the range of categories of supervision.
Following concern at the low number of
black clients on probation supervision, 1
made a small scale study of recommen-
dation and sentence in probation officers’
social enquiry reports, and suggested that
this was a cumulative process of racial
disadvantage in available sentence
options for black defendants; firstly at
the stage of referral for reports, secondly
in the proportion of recommendations
for probation and lastly in the concur-
rence between recommendation and
sentence by the court.

This paper moves away from a quan-
titative analysis of reports and looks first
at the qualitative nature of descriptive
material in reports. Secondly, whilst the
Probation Service acknowledges that it
works within a multi-racial society,
social work theory and practice is dom-
inated by white values and the attempts
to describe other cultures in reports,
whilst independent of illegal activity, can
seriously hinder the sentence outcome.
Thirdly, the structural factors within the
contents of reports and their implica-
tions within a judicial system, it is

argued, will predispose disadvantaged
groups to harsh sentencing, and by the
fact of racial disadvantage inevitably
black people will tend to suffer most.
Lastly, there is now concern amongst
probation officers that their work must
be informed by awareness of personal
and institutional racism if the position of
black people within the criminal justice
system is to be improved.

 

. . Social work theory and practice
is dominated by white values and
the attempts to describe other cul-
tures in reports . . . can seriously
hinder the sentence outcome.

 

The aims of any research are not
independent of the prevailing ethos in
social work and it is therefore not sur-
prising that most contributions to social
work journals focus upon the culture of
client groups. The intention in this paper
is to focus upon the attitudes of profes-
sional practitioners when dealing with
race and to suggest a prevailing ‘culture’
there. It is compiled after a series of
workshops held within the West Midlands
County Probation Service and uses
material brought for discussion there. T
would also like to acknowledge the con-
tinuing cooperative approach between
probation officers and black workers
from Handsworth Alternative Scheme,
which has engendered so much interest
locally in an examination of probation

43
officers’ value judgements on black
offenders. It is hoped that the paper will
assist a much wider audience to examine
its own practice.

Racism in action

The examples set out below are not
definitively racist. Readers will have to
judge for themselves whether they are
racist or not and whether in intent or
effect. The workshops have not consulted
the authors whom I trust are protected
by anonymity, but most examples have
the status of ‘expert’ opinions of profes-
sional workers. In court they are avail-
able to scrutiny and cross examination by
defendants or their advocates, but are
rarely challenged in this way.

Pompous nonsense

Since about the 2nd or 3rd of this month
he has not shown any particular signs or
symptoms of irue mental illness, Admit-
tedly there is about him a mild paranoid
attitude which | belicve to be part of a
cultural moré associated with his ethnic
propensities. As far as I am able to
ascertain, his personality is that of a
normally developed person considering his
background and origins.’

Psychiatric Report presented to Birming-
ham Magistrates’ Court, March 1980

To dismiss this example as nonsense is
easy. Clearly it is pompously written and
unhelpful to the court as a document
intended to give a useful psychiatric
opinion. But it is in the workshop’s
opinion also clearly racist and, given its
author’s status, may have influenced
sentence and attitudes of sentencers.

Distant and Negative
‘The sixth of eight children, is a native of
Birmingham of West Indian parents. Iis
early development appears to be normal
in the context of this family yet his
adolescence, as with his older brother, has
been turbulent. A fack of sound social
training and care and bad company are
attributed as being causes of his aberrant
behaviour. The influence of a socially
deviant older brother and also peer group
influences must also have played their
part.’
Probation Report to Birmingham Crown
Court, August 1982

The style in this example is distant
44

(some might say objective), but negative
and unsympathetic. How much does the
inter-personal relationship between client
and worker affect the recommendation
and outcome? ‘The eight children are
named, and there are six who haven’t
been in trouble. Another elder brother
is a university student; would his success
be attributed to the same lack of sound
social training and care? No mention
‘was made to him in the rest of the report.

Condemnatory

Elsewhere in the same report—

‘his mother claims that he can be trusied

when at home but she deplores the

Rastafarian identity and the company.

This culture is notorious in this city for

propounding peace and ‘love’ yet whose

fruits are otherwise.’

Many of the workshop members
believe that Rastafarians have received
such a consistently negative press that the
word itself should be avoided in reports.
Here Rastafarianism is condemned and
the opinions of the probation officer
clearly intrude. However, it is possible to
find genuinely positive descriptions of
Rastafarian beliefs where the worker
treats the defendant’s culture and beliefs
with dignity and respect. For example,
“Mr X is a deeply committed Rastafarian;
his life-style and beliefs are a reflection
of this. The worker’s own values and
opinions will firstly determine the client’s
response and affect the imformation
gathered during the enquiry. It will also
determine the extent to which the
workers will sce themselves able to assist
and befriend the client in future.

Black Britons dismissed

‘Mrs G came to this country from the
West Indies in 1961 and all the children
were born in England.’ .. . ‘M is a good
looking West Indian boy, who wears his
hair in dreadlocks. Since I met him in
February he has unfortunately become
increasingly truculent and obstructive in
his contact with adults.’ The recommen-
dation reads, ‘T would respectfully recom-
mend that the Court leave M in no doubt
at all as to its displeasure at his flagrant
disobedience.’

Social Services Report to Birmingham
Juvenile Court, August 1982
M was born in England, but is
described by this social worker as West
Indian. A common mistake which may
be influenced by the media, who seem
unable also to accept black children as
fully English. The juxtaposition of the
social worker’s contact with M and his
deteriorating attitude to adults may not
be entirely unconnected and the recom-
mendation to the court is brutally dis-
missive. For failure to attend the
Attendance Centre, M was sentenced to
Detention Centre and the social worker
immediately wrote to transfer him to the
Probation Service.

Suspect manner

Reports to the Parole Board are not
available to prisoners or their advocates
and perhaps are more prone to unsub-
stantiated opinion. In one report by
prison staff for parole, a prisoner was
described as, ‘an unusually quiet coloured
lad’. The implication was that he was not
to be trusted, because he failed to fit a
stereotypical image of ‘loud’ black lads.
Most comment however is more subtly
conveyed.

Illegal lifestyle

‘Ultimately he told me he would like to
return to Jamaica with his girlfriend. He
would like to work in agriculture over
there and says that he has enough family
connections in Jamaica to help in getting
settled and to find work. If granted
parole, he would return to live with his
parents, with his girlfriend (sic) and would
attempt to find work. He told me that
his main desire for early release on parole
was so that he could be with his various
children. He told me that he felt that he
had a good relationship with his after-care
probation officcr and that he would not
find it difficult to comply with the terms
of his licence. While X presents as a
picasant and co-operative individual, there
is no indication that he has any real in-
tention of modifying a life-style which is
almost inevitably going to fall foul of the
Law if practised in this country. I suspect
that his idea of returning to Jamaica is
in reality just a daydrcam and that until
and unless he starts setiously giving some
thought to adopting a more regulated
existence, it would not be appropriate to
grant parole.’

Prison probation officer’s Report ta Local
Review Committee, May 1980

The prisoner described here is clearly
Rastafarian in his beliefs. The lifestyle of
Rastafarians is particular to this country
and a response to black people's experi-
ence of its institutions, rather than an
imported form from Jamaica and Rasta-
farians live without ‘falling foul of the
Law’ in the city. The lifestyle is in itself
seen as illegal and in the probation
officer's view, it is ‘almost inevitable’ as
a result that parole will not be successful,
since arrest is inevitable. It may be that
Rastafarians are privately seen as over-
policed or subject to harassment, but the
probation officer is not going to let him
take his chance, despite the prisoner’s
confidence in his after-care probation
officer, which is clearly returned. He was
not granted parole. (Note the subtly con-
veyed message in the word ‘various’.)

Negative stereotypes

Another example related at one work-
shop was of a white girl accused of
soliciting for prostitution, where she had
previously lived with a West Indian man.
It is a fact that the man was of West
Indian ethnicity, but what greater
explanatory value than just ‘a man’? Why
should the negative attentions of a West
Indian man be any more difficult to
avoid than those of an Englishman? The
workshop believed that the girl, playing
on a stereotypical sexual image of black
men, used this to minimise her own
responsibility for her behaviour. We felt
that the probation officer should not
have conveyed this impression to magis-
trates unchallenged; that it should be
made clear that this was the girl’s
explanation, not that of the probation
officer.

Cultural Values

Several of the cxamples above are
descriptive of culturc. Probation officers
and social workers are required by the
courts to provide background informa-
tion on defendants. For those working
across cultures, where family life and
emotional relationships may not be
quickly shared nor understood, it is fre-

45
quently found that commonly held
beliefs are preferred as the cause of
delinquent activity. For example, the
separation of children from parents dur-
ing settlement of the family. Often black
parents are seen as over-punitive or over-
religious or over-protective. It is impor-
tant to establish on what basis the
judgement is being made. If white
workers have considerable experience of
black culture under description, then
perhaps they may be able to judge the
situation in the context of family life
which is by now familiar ta them. Far
too often the judgement is made on the
basic of the worker’s own cultural values
and assumptions. Expressions of emotions
like affection or anger are frequently
misinterpreted. Family size, expectations
of sexual partners, parental respon-
sibilities, discipline, work status and
leisure interests vary between cultures,
but more importantly are heavily value-
laden.

We feel that probation officers should
check their impressions with clients; dis-

Dimly perceived?

 

Joux H. B. Dixon
46

cuss the material to be included in
reports for courts with defendants; to
take the situation as perceived here and
now, rather than catalogue events of the
past of dubious relevance. One social
worker we spoke to had included a state-
ment in a court report about an over-
punitive mother. When asked about the
basis for the judgement, he admitted that
the remark was lifted from a report five
years old, when the child had been
received into care.

‘This would be poor social work prac-
tice in any context, but | think that
because it is a stereotypical misunder-
standing, it was included without dis-
cussion with the client concerned. Quite
frequently negative comments are attri-
buted to other professionals rather than
the author of the report.

Spurious balance

‘The family members have been mutually
supportive and the parents are respected
by their children. However, my colleagues
have found thai both parents have tended
to be strict and have relied on physical
punishment during the children’s forma-
tive years, although at the same time there
has been considerable affection within the
family.’

Here the liberal values of the white
worker show through clearly, unable to
reconcile culturally different discipline
with affection. There is an attempt to
introduce spurious balance in many
examples, but readers will be able to
decide for themselves which is the
dominant impression created. As white
workers become more familiar with work
across race and culture, they may be
trusted with more personal information.
The courts expect to be informed about
family responsibilities and workers who
treat this aspect of their work seriously
may attempt to inform sentencers about
different cultures within their reports.

Damning facts—partial explanations
‘x lives with his parents and girlfriend
(aged 20) at the above address with their
two children, A (12 months) and baby son
(two weeks). Also living at home is his
daughter M (five years} by a previous
relationship. X also has two children D
(three years) and A (18 months) by his
partner M (21 years). A long-standing
relationship, X spends many weekends
with M and her children, who live in a
council flat in the city. The girls are quite
aware of each other and of X’s continu-
ing interest in them both and his children.
Whilst the family and girls accept this
situation, which commonly occurs in the
West Indian context as a result of his-
torical proscriptions against marriage, X
feels that there is conflict engendered by
the simultaneous relationship, but is
drawn to both girls. He loves the child-
ren and is responsible towards them ail.
There will clearly be no immediate
resolution of the situation and both girls
wish him to stay permancntly with them.
I feel that the acceptance shown by X’s
mother and X’s quite genuine concern for
the children’s welfare are the most
important and creditable factors in what
may to the Court be an unusual family
pattern.’
Probation Report to Birmingham Magis-
trates’ Court, December 1980
Here the worker is trying to use the
conflicting relationship towards a justi-
fication for social work intervention
under a probation order. Whilst the
relationships described have no obvious
connection with the offences which were
committed, the parental relationships
were acknowledged in order to point out
the loss if a custodial sentence was
passed. A black probation officer at one
workshop felt that the explanation pre-
sented in this example was partial and
inadequate. Most white probation officers
see little wrong with this example. The
crucial point is how this report is likely
to be received; in fact the magistrate was
clearly indignant describing X as ‘keep-
ing a harem’ and he escaped immediate
imprisonment because of a long con-
sistent work record. His sentence was far
harsher than his two co-accused who had
elected not to receive social enquiry
reports. How will X describe himself to
the next well meaning probation officer?
Perhaps he will be described as in
another report ‘he was not prepared to
divulge the name of his girlfriend or to
discuss his personal problems with me’.
Most of the examples written by work-
shop members showed that they were
aware of this problem. Probation officers

were restricting information and opinion
so as nat to offend sentencers and risk
disadvantaging their clients further.

Distortion

One report looked at recently on an
adult offender listed all family members
and included a younger sister and her
two children described as ‘illegitimate’.
Certainty an unnecessarily value-laden
word, indirectly unfavourable to the
defendant. (Many social workers look for
negative factors within whole families
as if to provide explanations of delin-
quency.) Often unmarried black women
with children, supposedly living without
male support are described as being
abandoned by the fathers of the children.
The report writers are perhaps using con-
ventional white cultural values to
engender sympathy for the women in
courts. Is this a true reflection of the
choices of the partners? The absent men
arc blamed and in my view will be less
favourably received themselves in court
in future. There are cultural and
economic factors which combine to dis-
courage stable partnerships. Rastafarian
beliefs reject legal ‘paper’ marriages, and
in a largely unemployed young black
community, income is maximised by
partners claiming state benefits apart.
How conscious of economic factors are
the individuals concerned? It may be just
usual for men to stay with parents and in
this way economic factors are taken into
the culture. Equally, since state benefits
are given to male householders, women
will tend to represent themselves as
single parents in order to guarantee
provision for their children. But within
the context of Social Enquiry Reports
there is great value placed upon ‘stability’
of parents, and those that do not conform
to a monogamous ideal will tend not to
receive aS positive a picture for sen-
tencers. It is for this reason that black
social workers become exasperated with
whites, who just want to learn ‘a little
more’ about other cultures, without
examining their own powerful white
culture and its dominating values.

47
Structural inequality

Probation officers write about environ-
mental factors which impinge on the
lives of defendants, as well as the family
background and relationships which we
have seen can be poorly represented for
black defendants. Typically, housing
conditions, schooling and employment
are included in reports.

The criminal justice system holds each
individual legally responsible for their
own actions; the social enquiry report is
a document about the individual and
implicitly the individuals are each respon-
sible for the position in society in which
they find themselves. Probation officers
may describe the context but are very
wary of describing inequalities within
society. The courts are not the place for
such debate. Everybody is cqual before
the Law. But sentencers are caught
between ‘tariff’ for offences and the
consequences of sentencing. They tend. to
‘bend over backwards’ not to imprison
the employed and they will try to find
alternatives, so as not to jeopardize
income. The chances of finding work
again after release are reduced by stigma
and the economic climate. The same
reluctance to impose custodial sentences
is conversely not present for the unem-
ployed and where black people are dis-
proportionately unemployed they will
tend to receive custodial sentences more
frequently. There is considerable evidence
that the current educational process
leaves Afro-Caribbean children academic-
ally disadvantaged. The school curri-
culum is felt to be ethnocentric giving
few positive images to black children
either of their historical past or future
prospects.

Institutional racism

‘Very susceptible to environmental in-
fluences. His own personality is frag-
mented. He has a strong awareness of
racial prejudice. He has been reacting in
a negative fashion within the school and
these attitudes appear to have coloured
(sic) his view of life in general.’
Educational section of a@ social enquiry
report

48

These comments were five years old,
but the probation officer thought them
worth repeating. In this example the
negative experience of schooling for this
defendant is repeated in the terms of
those powerful enough to define that
experience. If we accept that our educa-
tion system will leave black people with
less opportunities for the future, then the
mere repetition of these educational
‘facts’ will create a less favourable
picture of the defendant before the
courts. Because the report is individual-
ised the failures of white institutions are
frequently seen as failures of black
individuals and the statement of them
will tend to disadvantage black people to
a greater extent than if no such back-
ground information was available to the
court and they were sentenced on the
offence characteristics only.

Confused expectations

Just as the attitudes of black children
and white teachers within schools are
affected negatively by poor expectations
of employment opportunities so the
probation officer’s recommendation is
likely to be affected by both the predicted
response to the formal requirements of
supervision and the anticipated ability to
assist the black probationer with the
seemingly insoluble problems which sur-
round him or her. One probation officer
was very candid in expressing her
confusion.

‘However, since the second Probation
Order was made, X has not been so co-
operative and has failed to keep appoint-
ments. 1 feel that this is not entirely his
fault because I too have found the
Probation Order quite meaningless. I have
found it quite difficult to try to get to
know X in the interview situation as he
only speaks when spoken to. From the
beginning of the order he lost interest in
locking for work, so we were unable to
plan a course of action together. I have
always found X to be a pleasant and
polite person, At the present time he is
looking for work.’

We can only hope that the court was
able to accept the honesty of this account
of the inter-personal nature of giving and
receiving supervision; that a better under-
standing of the client’s perceptions of the
meaning of probation supervision should
have been achieved and that ‘plans of
action’ need not necessarily be contingent
on employment. As one black probation
officer put it, ‘black people will only
speak when they know white people will
listen’. I feel that this example will strike
a chord with many white workers, being
part of their experience.

Sensitive staffing?

It is acknowledged that working with
race will necessarily necd commitment
and sensitivity, but with obvious trust
problems and language barriers alone, it
might be expected in the Probation Ser-
vice that workload measurement would
take account of this. That is not yet the
case. The designation of staff to any
particular area and therefore the selection
of staff to work with black people is still
held centrally where managers are
unlikely to have had experience them-
selves of the realities of the work.
Institutional racism within the Service
will have to be acknowledged before
these sorts of managerial changes will be
accepted.

Conclusion

The response of some _ probation
officers to these issucs has been to
restructure the social enquiry report.
They are trying to eliminate those tradi-
tional content factors, which seem to dis-
advantage the black defendant and
seriously cxamine their own values. The
emphasis in ‘strategic’ report writing is
to maximise the opportunities for black
defendants to improve their position in
all the structural areas which have left
them disadvantaged. The hope is that
sentencers will see the positive practice
of the Probation Service to attend to
these practical issues whilst under super-
vision. It would be naive to pretend that
this is an easy task to perform. The
existing opportunity structures have left

many black people desperate or dejected.
It is argued that before black people will
benefit from material provision, that
acceptance, confidence and real exchange
of perceptions is required.

Occasionally it will be necessary to
advise clients not to have reports written
upon them at all, because they would be
better represented by a solicitor who is
unashamedly on their side. They would
seriously be in jeopardy, because they
have naively trusted a probation officer
with information unconnected with their
court appearance, which would put them
or others at risk of further prosecution.
Frequently, this is the area of the infor-
mal economy, where by their own efforts
they are able to make money; activities
which would be praised if they were in
even part-time employment.

We see a picture at present of proba-
tion officers mainly unaware of the
racist assumptions which dominate their
work. Some examples of that work have
been examined here, from the most
obvious to the more subtle. The restricted
picture of the black lifestyle which
emerges from the wary descriptions of
the more enlightened, avoids the street
realities and puts off the day when con-
flicting value systems within different
cultures are examined. It is clear that the
social enquiry report is a dangerous
medium for providing information about
‘minority’ social values, and this paper is
written therefore to invite people to con-
sider their response, as recipients of the
service they pay for, as workers within
it, and in similar professions which make
judgements about blacks in Britain now.

 

Can do

Residents of Carpenter House Probation
Hostel, Birmingham, raised £700 for charity
at the National Motor Show recently, by
collecting up 100,000 discarded drinks cans
for salvage. Warden Bill Jones comments
that the enterprise gave a real boost to the
long-term unemployed residents and they
plan to repeat the effort at other events
this year.

 

49
