ACADEMIA

Accelerating the world's research.

Recognition bias for critical faces in
social phobics

Lars-Gunnar Lundh

Behaviour Research and Therapy

Cite this paper Downloaded from Academia.edu4

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers Download a PDF Pack of the best related papers 7

Information processing in social phobia: a critical review

 

Stefan Hofmann

Memory biases in the anxiety disorders
Meredith Coles

Cognitive bias and memory performance in patients with persistent insomnia
Lars-Gunnar Lundh
Behar. Res. Ther. Vol. 34, No. 10, pp. 787-794, 1996
Pergamon Copyright G 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd

Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved

S0005-7967(96)00035-6 0005-7967/96 $15.00 + 0.00

RECOGNITION BIAS FOR CRITICAL FACES IN SOCIAL
PHOBICS

LARS-GUNNAR LUNDH* and LARS-GORAN OST
Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, S-106 91, Stackholm, Sweden

(Received 25 March 1996)

Summary—Social phobics were compared with normal controls on a task of face recognition. The subjects
were presented with 20 photos, and were required to judge whether the persons on the photos were critical
or accepting; five minutes later they were unexpectedly presented with a recognition task. The social
phobics recagnized more of the critical than the accepting faces, whereas the controls tended to recognize
more accepting than critical faces. The results are discussed in terms of a possible recognition bias or
response bias, and in terms of differences in the encoding activities of the subjects. It is also argued that
research on memory in emotional disorders should make more use of concrete non-verbal stimuli (like
faces) in the future, since subjects’ encoding activities are more amenable to experimental control with
such stimuli than with verbal stimuli. Copyright © 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd

INTRODUCTION

Although patients with various kinds of anxiety disorders seem to show a clear encoding bias for
stimuli related to their specific fears, there is much less evidence for a similar memory bias.
Although the literature in this field is somewhat contradictory, the evidence indicates that memory
bias may differ (a) between various anxiety disorders, and (b) between different kinds of memory
tasks in Ss with the same anxiety disorder. First, whereas there is evidence of an explicit memory
bias for threat words in panic disorder (Cloitre & Liebowitz, 1991; Cloitre, Shear, Cancienne &
Zeitlin, 1994; McNally, Foa & Donnell, 1989), there is a lack of similar evidence in GAD patients
(Mathews, Mogg, May & Eysenck, 1989; Mogg, Mathews & Weinman, 1987; Mogg, Mathews &
Weinman, 1989) and in social phobics (Rapee, McCallum, Melville, Ravenscroft & Rodney,
1994: Cloitre, Cancienne, Heimberg, Holt & Liebowitz, 1995). Second, concerning memory tasks,
there is some evidence of an implicit memory bias for threat words in anxiety patients, even when
they show no evidence of an explicit memory bias (Mathews e7 a/., 1989; MacLeod & McLaughlin,
1995).

Memory tasks may differ in a number of ways. For example, a memory task may be explicit
or implicit, i.e. it may ask explicitly for the Ss’ memory, or it may present the Ss with some other
kind of task which will indirectly show something about their memory. Explicit tasks may involve
free recall, cued recall, or recognition; implicit tasks may involve word stem completion, word
fragment completion, lexical decision, anagram solution, tachistoscopic identification, etc. Memory
tasks may also differ as to the kind of stimuli involved, which may be verbal or non-verbal.
Most of the research done so far on memory bias in anxiety disorders has used verbal stimuli, and
very little is known about the memory functioning of anxiety patients on non-semantic stimuli.
One exception is Watts, Tresize and Sharrock (1986), who studied recognition memory for spiders
among spider phobics, and found some evidence of poorer recognition memory for big spiders
among the spider phobics than among controls.

One kind of non-verbal stimuli that may be especially relevant to social phobics is facial
stimuli. The basic fear in social phobia is about being negatively evaluated by others, and since
facial expression is an important way of conveying positive and negative evaluations, it may
be of interest to study memory for faces in social phobics. The purpose of the present study,
therefore, was to explore the possible existence of a bias on face recognition in patients with social
phobia.

*Author for correspondence.

787
788 Lars-Gunnar Lundh and Lars-Géran Ost

It is generally accepted that memory for faces is influenced by the S’s encoding activities. Bower
and Karlin (1974), for example, showed that facial recognition was better after judgments about
the perceived honesty or likeableness of a face than after judgments about its gender. Other studies
have shown consistently that memory for faces is considerably better following judgments of traits
such as honesty, friendliness, or intelligence than after judgments of specific physical features such
as size of nose, bushiness of eyebrows, or shape of chin (Winograd, 1978). According to the
elaboration hypothesis (Winograd, 1981), this trait superiority effect in facial memory is owing to
the amount of information that is encoded; in other words, judging personality traits improves
memory for faces because it leads to a more extensive scan of the face and, as a consequence, to
more information being encoded.

For the understanding of social phobia, it is relevant to ask whether the basic fears of social
phobics make them engage in different encoding activities than normal controls when perceiving
people’s faces, in such a way that it affects their recognition memory for faces. Two questions that
may be posed with regard to social phobics’ memory for human faces are: (1) if social phobics differ
from normal controls in their general ability to recognize faces, and (2) if they differ from controls
in their recognition memory for positively versus negatively perceived faces. One possibility is that
social anxiety leads to an inhibition of the person’s general tendency to scan human faces, or his/her
more specific tendency to scan ‘negative’ faces—this would result in a decreased capacity for face
recognition, or a recognition bias for positive faces. This would be analogous to the results found
by Watts et al. (1986) with spider phobics. Another possibility is that social anxiety, on the
contrary, is associated with an increased vigilance for human faces, or more specifically, for
‘negative’ faces—which would result in an increased scanning and an improved memory for faces,
or a recognition bias for negative faces.

In an earlier study (Lundh & Ost, 1996a) social phobics and normal controls were compared
on a face recognition task, where the encoding task was to judge 20 ordinary persons on photos
according to the quality of contact, or interaction, that the Ss expected with these persons if they
were to meet them in real life. Five minutes later the Ss were unexpectedly presented with a
recognition task which involved 80 faces, among which were the faces seen during the encoding
task. The results showed that although the social phobics judged the expected quality of interaction
as significantly lower than the controls, there were no group differences on the recognition of high
versus low interaction faces. That is, the social phobics showed no evidence of a recognition bias
with respect to positively or negatively perceived faces.

One possible critique of this study is that the encoding task used does not refer explicitly to the
social threat of negative evaluation—which is the social phobic’s basic fear—but rather to the
formation or non-formation of social bonds, which does not seem to be the basic concern of social
phobics. If Ss’ encoding activities are important for their memory for faces, then it may be argued
that a memory bias in social phobics may be most likely to appear with an encoding task which
activates the social fears of negative evaluation in a more direct way. One way of activating people’s
possible fears of negative evaluation while watching photos of unfamiliar persons is to let them
rate the degree of ‘critical’ or ‘accepting’ attitude of the persons seen. The purpose of the present
study, therefore, was to explore whether social phobics have a recognition bias for faces encoded
as ‘critical’ or ‘accepting’.

METHOD

Subjects

The Ss were 20 social phobics (of which 17 had a subdiagnosis of generalized social phobia) and
20 normal controls. The Ss in the social phobia group were part of a treatment study with
cognitive-behaviour therapy, and ali of them met the DMS-HI-R (American Psychiatric
Association, 1987) criteria for social phobia. All patients were tested individually before starting
therapy, but after having been evaluated for the treatment project. As part of the treatment study
they were interviewed with the revised version of the Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule
(ADIS-R; DiNardo & Barlow, 1988). Interviewers rated Ss on the 0-8 Severity Rating Scale,
included in the ADIS-R, and only S's who received a rating of four (moderate impairment) or
greater were included in this study. The mean score on the severity rating scale was 5.55 (SD 1.23):
Recognition bias for critical faces in social phobics 789

the patients themselves rated the severity of their phobia as 6.45 (SD 1.43) on a 0-8 rating scale
that is part of Marks and Mathews (1979) Fear Questionnaire. Potential Ss were excluded if they
received a diagnosis of primary depression, bipolar disorder, psychotic disorder or active drug or
alcohol dependence. All patients were tested individually before starting therapy, but after having
been evaluated for the therapy project.

The control group were volunteers who were matched to the social phobics for sex and
age (+2 yr). They were recruited in two ways: (a) with advertisements in a living area not
far from the university; these Ss were paid 100 SEK for their participation in the study; and
(b) undergraduate students in psychology, who received course credit for their participation. The
control Ss underwent a screening interview with a short version of the ADIS-R (DiNardo &
Barlow, 1988) to rule out previous or current mental disorder before being included in the study.
The sex distribution was the same for both groups (18 women and 2 men), and they did not differ
in age; the social phobics were 31.8 (SD = 7.0) yr old, whereas the controls were 31.7 (SD = 12.0)
yr old. As to educational level, among the social phobics 10 Ss had studied at the university,
whereas 10 had not; among the controls 13 had studied at the university, whereas 7 had not; this
difference was not statistically significant (x? = 0.92).

The social phobics scored significantly higher than the controls on the Social Anxiety
Scale of Fenigstein, Scheier and Buss’ (1975) Self-Consciousness Questionnaire [19.05 vs 7.72,
1(38) = 9.50, P < 0.0001].

Materials

The materials were the same as that used in an earlier study by Lundh and Ost (1996a). Black
and white photographs of 80 persons (40 men, 40 women) were taken from a larger material
originally used by Backman (1991). The photos portrayed faces of young to middle-aged persons
that were unfamiliar to the Ss. Twenty of these persons (the target persons) were represented by
two slightly different photos: one that was presented during the encoding task, and one that was
presented during the recognition task. The 60 remaining faces were distractors which were only
shown during the recognition task. Since the two photos of the 20 target persons were taken on
one and the same occasion, they involved no differences in terms of age, hair length, beard, or other
more constant aspects of the person’s face; the differences between the two photos merely concerned
temporary aspects like the facial expressions of the persons seen.

There were two reasons for using slightly different photos of the target persons in the
encoding and recognition tasks: (1) By using slightly different photos, the recognition task
becomes more similar to real-life situations, where people never appear with exactly the same
facial expression and from exactly the same physical perspective. That is, the task is not only
to recognize a photo, but to recognize a person, which may be assumed to be a more ecologically
valid task. (2) By using slightly different photos, the recognition task becomes more sensitive to
differences in the amount of information encoded by the Ss. According to Winograd’s (1981)
elaboration hypothesis, the more a S scans a photo of a person’s face, the more information he
or she will encode not only about superficial features, like the person’s temporary facial
expression, but also about more invariant properties of the faces seen. If Ss tend to scan certain
faces more than others, then this may be expected to result in a better ability to recognize
these faces even when they are confronted with a slightly different photo in the recognition task.
If exactly the same photo had been chosen in both the encoding task and the recognition
task, the chances of detecting group differences due to variations in the amount of scanning
would be less.

Procedure

At the encoding stage, the Ss were instructed to look through a file with 20 photographs
(10 males and 10 females), sized 12 x 18 cm. The faces were presented in a fixed order, which had
been determined by a random procedure, but was the same for all Ss. As encoding task, they were
required to judge whether they perceived the person seen as a critical or accepting person, i.e. “as
a person who is generally critical towards others and tends to find faults with other people, or as
generally accepting and tolerant with regard to others’ shortcomings”. This rating was done on
a S-point scale, where 1 meant ‘a very accepting person’ and 5 meant ‘a very critical person’.

BRT 3410 -C
790 Lars-Gunnar Lundh and Lars-Géran Ost

Table 1. Mean number of hits, false alarms, and d’ values on the face recognition

 

 

task
Social phobics Control subjects
M SD M sD
Number of faces recognized 16.5 28 14.8 44
False alarms 37 3.1 3.3 2.8
d 3. 1.4 31 1.9

 

It was explained that the Ss should try to ‘catch their immediate impression’ of the persons on
the photos, and that they should not dwell too long on any single face.

Following the encoding task, Ss were given an unrelated task (word stem completion) for about
5 min. As recognition task, they were then instructed to look through a file with 80 numbered
photographs, numbered from 1 to 80, with the information that among these were the 20 persons
they had seen before. Their task was to say aloud the number attached to persons they recognized,
which was then recorded by the experimenter. All Ss were presented with the faces in a fixed order
which had been determined by a random procedure. After memory testing, the Ss completed a
number of self-assessment questionnaires, including the Social Anxiety subscale on Fenigstein
et al.’s (1975) Self-Consciousness Scale.

RESULTS

Face ratings

There was no group difference on the degree to which the faces on the photos were seen as critical
or accepting [mean rating 2.88 vs 2.88; (38) = —0.02].

Face recognition

The number of faces that were recognized (the hits) and the number of faces that were incorrectly
identified at the recognition trial (the false alarms) are shown in Table 1. There was no significant
group difference neither on hits [#(38) = 1.42, P = 0.16] nor on false alarms [t(38) = 0.43], and
signal detection analysis revealed no significant difference on a’ [t(38) = 0.11].

Bias on the face recognition task

Bias on the face recognition task was studied in two ways: (a) by comparing the mean
proportions of critical vs accepting faces that were recognized by each group, and (b) by comparing
the mean ‘critical-accepting’ ratings of the recognized and non-recognized faces for each group.
The first measure was called ‘recognition bias’, and the second ‘rating bias’.

Recognition bias

For each S, the target faces were divided into three categories, depending on the S’s rating
of the degree of critical or accepting attitudes of the persons seen: faces rated as 4 or 5
were categorized as critical, faces rated as 3 were categorized as neutral, and faces rated as
2 or 1 were categorized as accepting. The number of faces that were rated as critical and
accepting, and the number of critical and accepting faces that were recognized by the social phobics
and the control Ss are shown in Table 2. The proportion of the critical and accepting faces

Table 2. Mean numbers of faces rated as critical and accepting, and mean
numbers (and proportions) of ‘critical’ and ‘accepting’ faces that were recognized

 

 

Social phobics Control subjects
M sD M 8D
Number of faces
rated as ‘critical’ (4-5) 6.4 2.3 6.7 3.
rated as ‘accepting’ (1-2) 78 24 77 2.5
Number of faces recognized
rated as ‘critical’ 3.7 2.1 47 2.9
rated as ‘accepting’ 63 2.6 6.5 2.9
Proportion faces recognized
rated as ‘critical’ 0.89 0.13 0.72 0.27

rated as ‘accepting’ 0.79 0.19 0.83 0.20

 
Recognition bias for critical faces in social phobics 791

(i.e. the faces that were so rated by each S’) that were recognized was computed for each S$; 2 Ss, 1
in each group, had to be excluded from this analysis since they rated no face as critical.

In order to investigate if there was any recognition bias for critical or accepting faces in the
two groups of Ss, a mixed ANOVA on the proportion of recognized faces was computed with
Group (2: Social Phobics, Controls) as between-S's variable, and Face Category (2: Critical,
Accepting) as within-Ss variable. The mean proportions of critical and accepting faces that were
recognized in the two groups are shown in Table 2. The results showed no main effect of Group
[F(1,36) = 1.44], or Face Category [F(1,36) = 0.07]. but a highly significant interaction effect
[F(1,36) = 9.20, P < 0.005].

In order to clarify this interaction, paired tests were used to compare the proportion of critical
and accepting faces that were recognized by each group separately. The results showed that the
social phobics recognized significantly more critical than accepting faces [#(18) = 2.44, P < 0.05,
two-tailed], whereas there was an almost significant difference in the opposite direction among the
controls [#(18) = — 1.99, P = 0.06, two-tailed].

Among the 19 social phobics, 11 Ss showed a bias for the recognition of critical faces, in the
sense that they recognized a larger proportion of critical than accepting faces. Only 3 social
phobics showed a bias in the opposite direction, i.e. they recognized more accepting than critical
faces. The remaining 5 social phobics showed no bias in any direction, i.e. they recognized
proportionately as many critical as accepting faces. Among the controls, 7 showed a recognition
bias for accepting faces, 3 showed a bias for critical faces, and 9 showed no bias. This group
difference was statistically significant [y? = 8.29, P < 0.02].

Rating bias

The hypothesis of a bias for critical vs accepting faces was also tested by adding the
critical-accepting ratings of the recognized and unrecognized faces, for each S. These added
scores were then divided by the number of faces actually recognized and not recognized,
respectively, for each S. This resulted in two mean scores of degree of perceived critical attitude
(1-5) of recognized and unrecognized faces for each S (see Table 3). Three Ss in each group
had to be excluded from this comparison, since they recognized all 20 faces on the recognition
trial. This left 17 Ss in each group, for which a mixed ANOVA was computed, with Group (2:
Social Phobics, Controls) as between-Ss variable, and Face Category (2: Recognized,
Unrecognized) as within-Ss variable. The results showed no main effect of Group [F(1,32) = 1.35],
or of Face Category [F(1,32) = 0.14], but a highly significant interaction effect [F(1,32) = 10.2,
P < 0.005].

In order to clarify this interaction, paired t-tests were used to compare the critical-accepting
valence of the recognized vs the unrecognized faces in each group separately. The results showed
that the recognized faces were rated as significantly more critical than the unrecognized faces by
the social phobics [#(16) = 2.53, P < 0.05], whereas there was a significant difference in the opposite
direction among the controls, ie. they rated the recognized faces as less critical than the
unrecognized faces [1(16) = —2.15, P < 0.05].

On this rating bias measure, 14 of 17 social phobics showed a bias for critical faces, in the
sense that the faces they recognized were rated as more critical than the faces that they did not
recognize, whereas only three social phobics showed a bias in the opposite direction, ie. the
faces they recognized were rated as less critical than the faces that they did not recognize.
Among the controls, 11 Ss showed a bias for accepting faces, 4 showed a bias for critical
faces, and 2 showed no bias. This group difference was highly statistically significant [y? = 12.13,
P< 0.005).

Table 3. Mean ratings of faces that were recognized and not recognized

 

Social phobics Control subjects
M sD M sD

 

Ratings (1-5) of
Faces recognized 2.95 0.23 2.79 0.38
Faces unrecognized 2.68 0.45 3.42 0.56

 
792 Lars-Gunnar Lundh and Lars-Goran Ost

Bias correlations

In order to study the correlation between recognition and rating bias, separate indices of these
two measures of bias were computed. A recognition bias index was computed by subtracting the
proportion of recognized accepting faces from the proportion of recognized critical faces for each
S.A similar rating bias index was computed by subtracting the critical-accepting valence of the
unrecognized faces from the critical-accepting valence of the recognized faces for each S. These
two bias indices correlated r = 0.90 [P < 0.0001]. Among the social phobics, the correlation was
r = 0.84, and among the controls r = 0.88.

DISCUSSION

The social phobics in the present study showed a clear bias for ‘critical’ vs ‘accepting’ faces on
the recognition task, whereas the control Ss had a tendency in the opposite direction. The social
phobics showed a significant bias for critical faces both on the measure of recognition bias
(i.e. they recognized a higher proportion of critical than accepting faces) and on the measure of
rating bias (i.e. the faces they recognized had a higher rating on ‘criticalness’ than the faces that
were not recognized). The controls, on the contrary, showed a significant bias for accepting faces
on the rating bias measure, and an almost significant bias for accepting faces on the measure of
recognition bias.

These results contrast with earlier research, where it has been difficult to demonstrate explicit
memory biases in social phobics (Rapee et a/., 1994; Cloitre et al., 1995). The results in the present
study are similarly at odds with an earlier study by Lundh and Ost (1996a) where the Ss were
presented with the same faces as in the present study but had another encoding task (i.e. judging
the expected quality of contact that would take place with these persons if they were to meet them
in real life), and where the social phobics did not differ from the controls on the recognition task.
This suggests that the Ss’ encoding activities may be of crucial importance for their performance
on the recognition task.

Earlier research indicates that face recognition is considerably better following judgments of
traits (Winograd, 1981), The present research suggests that this effect depends on the specific
meaning that a certain ‘trait’ has for the individual. It may be assumed that each person’s cognitive
network of meaning structures involve ‘trait nodes’, i.e. nodes for trait concepts like ‘honest’,
‘friendly’, ‘intelligent’, ‘critical’, ‘accepting’, etc. These kinds of traits may have a different meaning
for different persons, i.e. their corresponding nodes may be part of different networks of meaning
structures (Lundh, 1983, 1995). The results in the present study are consistent with the hypothesis
that the trait node of being ‘critical’ is part of a more highly organized network of meaning
structures in social phobics than in controls, and that the encoding of faces as ‘critical’ will therefore
make these faces more easy to recognize for social phobics.

There is, however, a possible alternative explanation which cannot be ruled out. It is theoretically
possible that the results in this study reflect a response bias, rather than a true recognition bias.
This hypothesis cannot be ruled out with the present design, since the Ss did not rate the degree
of critical attitude of the distracter faces shown during the recognition task. It is theoretically
possible that faces which would have been rated as ‘critical’ were overrepresented among those
distracter faces which were erroneously claimed to be recognized by the social phobics, and
underrepresented among those distracter faces erronously claimed to be recognized by the controls.
The bias would then reflect a greater tendency for controls to guess that a face had been presented
if it was accepting, and a greater tendency for social phobics to guess that a face had been presented
if it was critical. The ideal design would have required that the Ss rate the degree of critical attitude
for the distracter faces, following the completion of the recognition task. This would have provided
measures of ‘hits’ and ‘false alarms’ for each face category, so that a signal detection analysis could
have been carried out with a calculation of d’ and B measures for each ‘valence’ of face. If the
observed interaction had been obtained using such @’ measures, it would have been possible to rule
out this alternative explanation of a response bias, and to make stronger claims concerning the
involvement of biased recognition memory.

It is noteworthy that the social phobics in the present study did not rate the persons on the photos
as more critical than the controls did. This may seem surprising, in view of the evidence (e.g. Leary,
Recognition bias for critical faces in social phobics 793

Kowalski & Campbell, 1988), which indicates that socially anxious persons tend to have a
generalized expectancy that other people are likely to be critical. It should be noted, however, that
Leary et al. asked their Ss to rate how they expected that certain imagined persons (a professor,
a fellow airplane passenger, and a friend’s acquaintance) would rate others in a number of
hypothesized situations. The Ss in the present study, on the contrary, were asked to rate the degree
of critical or accepting attitude of persons whose faces were actually perceived on photos. Whereas
Leary et al. (1988) asked for Ss’ beliefs, or generalized expectancies, about people’s critical
attitudes, the task in the present study asked the Ss to look at photos of real people and judge
the degree of critical attitude which they perceived in their faces—which, in fact, is not altogether
dissimilar from cognitive techniques that are used for testing patients’ beliefs. In short, if the
encoding task in the present study taps the Ss’ capacity for social perception, rather than their
beliefs or general expectancies, then there seems to be no reason to expect that social phobics should
rate the faces as more critical than the controls.

The results of the present study show that, although the social phobics did not rate the persons
on the photos as more critical than the control S's did, they had better memory for the faces they
had rated as critical—or, alternatively (according to the response bias explanation) had a greater
tendency to guess that a face had been presented if it was critical. Whether the present results are
due to a genuine recognition bias or a response bias, they demonstrate a difference between social
phobics and normal controls that deserves further exploration.

Methodologically, a case may be made for more use of non-verbal stimuli, like faces, in future
research on memory bias in emotional disorders. One reason for this is that Ss’ encoding activities
are generally more amenable to experimental control with non-verbal than verbal stimuli. Consider,
for example, the imagination task that has been used in several studies of memory for threat-related
words in anxiety patients (Mathews ef a/., 1989; Rapee et al., 1994; Lundh & Ost, 1996b). In this
paradigm, the Ss are presented with individual words during 10 sec, and are instructed to imagine
a situation which involves both the word and themselves; such a task obviously leaves room for
a much larger variation of encoding activities in the Ss than is the case in the present study. Words
are abstract entities, which may at best represent categories of phenomena, and the instruction to
judge a word in some respect leaves the question open which concrete instantiation of the verbal
concept is to be judged? In this way, words are one step further away from the real world of
interaction with other persons than are people’s faces, and this makes it considerably more difficult
to control the Ss’ way of encoding words experimentally.

If Ss’ encoding activities are important for their emotional response to stimuli, which they should
be according to cognitive models of psychopathology, then we need to be able to control these
encoding activities experimentally in order to explore their effects. In the present study, the Ss’
encoding activities during the presentation of each photo were controlled by a task which required
them to rate the degree to which the persons on the photos were seen as critical or accepting, and
this produced significant group differences on the recognition task. In the earlier study on face
recognition by Lundh and Ost (1996a), the Ss’ encoding activities were controlled by another kind
of task (i.e. rating the expected quality of contact that would take place with the persons on the
photos if the Ss were to meet them in real life), and this produced no group differences on the
recognition task. One possible explanation of this difference in results is that the encoding tasks
activated different emotional concerns in the Ss. The rating task used in the present study (critical
or accepting’) is more likely to activate emotional concerns of negative evaluation, whereas the
rating task used in the earlier study (‘good or bad contact?’) is more likely to activate emotional
concerns of forming or not forming social bonds with others. Whether these effects are owing
to a genuine recognition bias or a response bias, they indicate that experiments which control
the encoding activities of the Ss may be of potential interest in future cognitive research on
psychopathology. That is, it may be of great interest to enter variations in encoding activities as
independent variables in future experiments, and this is probably facilitated by the use of
non-verbal stimuli.

REFERENCES

American Psychiatric Association (1987). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (3rd edn, revised).
Washington, DC: Author.
794 Lars-Gunnar Lundh and Lars-Géran Ost

Backman, L. (1991). Recognition memory across the adult life span: The role of prior knowledge. Memory and Cognition,
19, 63-71.

Bower, G. H. & Karlin, M. B. (1974). Depth of processing pictures of faces and recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 103, 751-757.

Cloitre, M. & Liebowitz, M. R. (1991). Memory bias in panic disorder: An investigation of the cognitive avoidance
hypothesis. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 15, 371-386.

Cloitre, M., Shear, K., Cancienne, J. & Zeitlin, S. B. (1994). Implicit and explicit memory for catastrophic associations
to bodily sensation words in panic disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 18, 225-240.

Cloitre, M., Cancienne, J., Heimberg, R. G., Holt, C. S. & Liebowitz, M. R. (1995). Memory bias does not generalize across
anxiety disorders. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 305-307.

DiNardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule-Revised. Albany, NY: Center for Stress
and Anxiety Disorders, University at Albany.

Fenigstein, A., Scheier, M. F. & Buss, A. H. (1975). Public and private self-consciousness: Assessment and theory. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 43, 522-527.

Leary, M. R., Kowalski, R. M. & Campbell, C. D. (1988). Self-presentational concerns and social anxiety: The role of
generalized impression expectancies. Journal of Research in Personality, 22, 308-321.

Lundh, L. G. (1983). Mind and meaning. Towards a theory of the human mind considered as a system of meaning
structures. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis. In Studia Psychologica Upsaliensia (Vol. 10). Uppsala.

Lundh, L. G. (1995) Meaning structures and mental representations. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 36, 363-385.

Lundh, L. G., & Ost, L, G. (1996a). Face recognition in social phobics. Scandinavian Journal of Behaviour Therapy, in
press.

Lundh, L. G., & Ost, L. G. (1996b). Implicit and explicit memory bias in social phobics. Unpublished manuscript.

MacLeod, C. & McLaughlin, K. (1995). Implicit and explicit memory bias in anxiety: A conceptual replication. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 33, 1-14.

Mathews, A., Mogg, K., May, J. & Eysenck, M. (1989). Implicit and explicit memory bias in anxiety. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 98, 236-240.

Marks, 1. M. & Mathews, A. M. (1979). Brief standard self-rating for phobic patients. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
17, 263-267.

McNally, R. J., Foa, E. B. & Donnell, C. D. (1989). Memory bias for anxiety information in patients with panic disorder.
Cognition and Emotion, 3, 27-44.

Mogg, K., Mathews, A. & Weinman, J. (1987). Memory bias in clinical anxiety. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 96, 94-98.

Mogg, K., Mathews, A. & Weinman, J. (1989). Selective processing of threat cues in anxiety states: A replication. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 27, 317-323.

Rapee, R. M., McCallum, S. L., Melville, L. F., Ravenscroft, H. & Rodney, J. M. (1994). Memory bias in social phobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 89-99.

Watts, F. N., Tresize, L. & Sharrock, R. (1986). Processing of phobic stimuli. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 25,
253-259.

Winograd, E. (1978). Encoding operations which facilitate memory for faces across the life-span. In M. M. Gruneberg,
P. E. Morris & R. N. Sykes (Eds.), Practical Aspects of Memory. New York: Academic Press.

Winograd, E. (1981). Elaboration and distinctiveness in memory for faces. Journal of Experimental Psychology, Human
Learning and Memory, 7, 181-190.
