i _—_—_—

f

wa

 

-

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Univ of Haifa on November 22, 2022 from IP addre

 

Check for
updates:

 

 

 

Reputation offsets trust judgments based on social

biases among Airbnb users

Bruno Abrahao*", Paolo Parigi®, Alok Gupta‘, and Karen S. Cook*'

4Department of Sociology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; Institute for Research in the Social Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305;

and ‘Data Science Division, Airobnb, San Francisco, CA 94103

Contributed by Karen S. Cook, July 20, 2017 (sent for review March 15, 2016; reviewed by David Lazer and Chris Snijders}

To provide social exchange on a global level, sharing-economy
companies leverage interpersonal trust between their members
on a scale unimaginable even a few years ago. A challenge to
this mission is the presence of social biases among a large hetero-
geneous and independent population of users, a factor that hin-
ders the growth of these services. We investigate whether and
to what extent a sharing-economy platform can design artificially
engineered features, such as reputation systems, to override peo-
ple’s natural tendency to base judgments of trustworthiness on
social biases. We focus on the common tendency to trust oth-
ers who are similar (i.e., homophily) as a source of bias. We test
this argument through an online experiment with 8,906 users of
Airbnb, a leading hospitality company in the sharing economy.
The experiment is based on an interpersonal investment game,
in which we vary the characteristics of recipients to study trust
through the interplay between homophily and reputation. Our
findings show that reputation systems can significantly increase
the trust between dissimilar users and that risk aversion has an
inverse relationship with trust given high reputation. We also
present evidence that our experimental findings are confirmed by
analyses of 1 million actual hospitality interactions among users
of Airbnb.

online trust | reputation systems | sharing economy | social biases | risk

new wave of companies, emerging under the banner of

the sharing economy (1), is profoundly altering the way we
interact and exchange with one another. These Internet-based
services are driving a major change in our cultural and technolog-
ical landscapes and have achieved astounding success, enabling
users to share their own personal resources, such as their vehi-
cles, real estate properties, time, or skills. A growing number of
individuals trust the sharing economy with a variety of services to
satisfy their needs, to generate income, or, more simply, to meet
new people. Examples of sharing-economy transactions include
hiring a “tasker” from Task Rabbit to run errands, sharing a
“couch” with a perfect stranger through CouchSurfing, hiring a
“driver” on Uber, or staying in someone’s home while traveling
using Airbnb.

Users in the sharing economy seek to connect with others
engaged in activities on the same platform. Compared with
exchanges via traditional e-commerce companies, where trans-
actions are relatively anonymous, the sharing economy exposes
us to the more personal character of such interactions. This
inevitably prompts attention to the users’ sociodemographic
characteristics as factors that drive selection.

As a consequence, social biases figure as major hurdles to the
growth of sharing-economy services, as they influence users’ per-
ceptions of trust and risk. To enable trust between strangers so
that everyone can exchange with anyone, beyond cultural and
social boundaries, these companies face daunting obstacles in
their attempts to minimize these biases.

In this study, we investigate whether and to what extent a
sharing-economy platform can design technological features to
counteract natural behavioral tendencies that may lead to social
biases. This question is of central importance in the social sci-
ences more broadly, but also in the engineering of platforms that
aim to enable trust.

9848-9853 | PNAS | September 12,2017 | vol. 114 | no. 37

Social biases are a result of a number of mechanisms that
are difficult to measure. In this work, we make social biases
amenable to investigation by focusing on a form of social bias
that naturally maps into a quantifiable interpretation and that
we expect to be at work in these environments. At the same time,
this source of bias is well understood in the social sciences so that
we can rely on previous literature, instead of opening up a new
dimension of complexity. To this end, we focus on homophily (2—
6), the higher likelihood that people trust others who are similar
to themselves.

McPherson (4) proposed a theory of how homophily struc-
tures modern societies using a construct of social space defined in
Blau’s theory of preferences (6). Each individual occupies a posi-
tion in the social space whose coordinates are a function of his
or her sociodemographic characteristics. The more features two
individuals share in common, the more likely they are to form
relationships based on mutual trust.

To operationalize homophily in a structured way, we use
Blau’s construct of social space to induce and measure the effect
of homophily in an experimental setting whose volunteers are
active members of the sharing economy. (At the time of writing,
the online experiment is accepting participants for demonstra-
tion purposes at stanfordexchange.org.)

Building on this baseline, the heart of our experiment is the
measurement of the extent to which another source of informa-
tion that can be artificially engineered could potentially alter the

 

Significance

We investigate the extent to which artificial features engi-
neered by sharing-economy platforms, such as reputation sys-
tems, can be used to override people’s tendency to base
judgments of trustworthiness on social biases, such as to
trust others who are similar (i.e., homophily). To this end,
we engaged 8,906 users of Airbnb as volunteers in an online
experiment. We demonstrate that homophily based on sev-
eral demographic characteristics is a relatively weak driver of
trust. In fact, having high reputation is enough to counteract
homophily. Using Airbnb data, we present evidence that the
effects we found experimentally are at work in the actual plat-
form. Lastly, we found an inverse relationship between risk
aversion and trust in those with positive reputations.

 

 

 

Author contributions: B.A., P.P, and K.S.C. designed research; B.A., PP., and A.G. per-
formed research; B.A. and P.P. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; B.A., P.P., A.G.,
and K.S.C. analyzed data; and B.A., P.P., and K.S.C. wrote the paper.

Reviewers: D.L., Northeastern University; and C.S., Eindhoven University.

Conflict of interest statement: A.G. is a data scientist at Airbnb who performed the exper-
iments that rely on the company’s private data. Paolo Parigi began working at Uber after
the research design, experiment execution, data analysis, and writing of the study were
completed.

Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.

Data deposition: The data necessary to replicate our experimental results are available

through the Stanford Exchange Project at stanfordexchange.org/project.

"To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: abrahao@cs.stanford.edu or
kcook@stanford.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.16042341 14/-/DCSupplemental.

www. pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas. 1604234114
 

a
a
a
vo
iS

|

3
s

A,

a
ei
S

&

a

a

S

a

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Univ of Haifa on November 22

perception of trust structured by homophily and counteract this
natural tendency. To this end, we focus on the reputation system
(7, 8), which platforms use to allow users to review and to “rate”
the behavior of other members (7).

The premise of reputation systems is that the aggregate rating
associated with a person is an indicator of the quality and the
risk entailed in potential transactions with that individual. We
hypothesize that it is because of these reputation systems that the
lack of direct experience in interacting with unknown and distant
alters does not generate paralyzing uncertainty.

Nonetheless, previous research presents only weak evidence
that reputation systems serve as safeguards of opportunistic
behavior, which would result in increased trust (9). Moreover,
there has been limited quantification of the extent to which rep-
utation systems have the capacity to increase trust between those
with different degrees of dissimilarity in social space. This study
directly measures interpersonal trust structured by the interplay
between homophily and reputation.

Researchers have extensively studied reputation systems in
online platforms in auction markets (10), crowdsourcing (10, 11),
and the sharing economy (12-14). The latter case is of particu-
lar interest, as the user population, as well as the pool of services
they offer, is too large and diverse to be standardized, while users
cannot rely directly on preexisting institutional arrangements to
inform their decisions.

Measuring trust as a function of the influence of social distance
or reputation directly on a sharing-economy platform represents
a major research challenge that is not amenable to direct manip-
ulation by researchers. The platform exposes users to features of
the alternatives that are confounded with trust. Features, such
as color preference, attractiveness, etc., are difficult to isolate,
categorize, or quantify. These factors are highly heterogeneous,
and users infer them subjectively and indirectly through photos
or other signals, as opposed to through structured data that the
platform displays. Moreover, when the platform presents users
with alternatives, we observe the outcome of the user’s thought
process by their selections, but it is difficult to capture and
quantify their preferences between every pair among the avail-
able alternatives without making the selection process unnec-
essarily complex.

Due to such challenges, we designed a large-scale online labo-
ratory in collaboration with Airbnb, one of the world’s most suc-
cessful sharing-economy companies, with >2 million hospitality
listings in >190 countries. We engaged 8,906 Airbnb users as vol-
unteers to participate in an experiment external to Airbnb’s plat-
form, with the aim of collecting behavioral data on decisions that
involve trust, while isolating other confounding factors (15).

Traditionally, buyers and sellers may develop trust and engage
in multiple exchanges over time. However, relationships in the
sharing economy usually result in one-time transactions. To
mimic this scenario while allowing for comparability with pre-
vious literature, we drew from research on behavioral economics
and social psychology to use standard methods to measure inter-
personal trust. To this end, we designed a variation of the widely
studied investment game (16, 17).

In the experiment, participants played the role of Investor and
started with a number of credits. We showed them five profiles,
which we presented as belonging to other randomly selected
Airbnb users who had entered their information in a previous
round. These other users were playing the role of receivers with
incentives to accumulate credits. We displayed the receivers’
demographics and reputation features, resembling the way the
platform presents users with potential partners via search results.
We then gave incentives for participants to seek favorable invest-
ment outcomes in a single-shot interaction with the receivers by
offering potential rewards.

The credits participants invested in a profile were multiplied
by three and given to that receiver. In the spirit of the prisoner’s
dilemma game (18), the receiver could cooperate with the par-
ticipant and return a good portion of the credits invested in them

Abrahao et al.

(to help the participant increase her credits) or defect and keep
most or all of these credits (in which case the participant loses
credits). As participants put themselves in a vulnerable position
through investments, the amount of investment in each receiver
served as an indirect proxy for how much trust they placed in the
receivers to return credits.

While we presented the profiles to participants as other Airbnb
users also participating in the experiment, we actually generated
these profiles in advance. Our goal was to understand how par-
ticipants assign trust and the relative importance of each facet,
homophily or reputation, as we varied demographic and reputa-
tion features experimentally.

We present evidence, first, that homophily is at play to a sig-
nificant extent when participants make trust decisions. Second,
we show that the reputation system makes possible the construc-
tion of expectations that counterbalance the tendency toward
homophily. This results in the extension of trust to dissimilar
users in social space. Third, we show a strong inverse relationship
between risk aversion and trust in the case of high reputations.
Lastly, we used insights gained through the experiment to guide
our analysis of Airbnb data containing 1 million real-world inter-
actions. We show evidence that the diversity of users who select
others with whom to have a hospitality interaction increases as
the reputation of the partners gets higher.

Experimental Design

We sent invitations to 100,000 Airbnb users who identified as US
residents, of which 8,906 responded and registered to participate
(6,714 completed their entire participation). Table $1 presents
the univariate distributions of the demographics over the partic-
ipants, and Tables S2—S4 analyze self-selection bias. Each par-
ticipant built a short profile by providing us with four pieces of
information reflecting their demographics—namely, age, gender,
marital status, and home state. We chose these features for their
simplicity, allowing us to conveniently operationalize Blau’s con-
struct experimentally while reducing participation attrition.

We required that the experiment reflect, as much as possible,
the way users make decisions on the platform, except for factors
that are external to trust. In the platform, users are pressed to
make the best possible decisions, as it is imperative to eliminate
risks associated with critical factors, such as their safety, while
maximizing satisfaction and minimizing cost. Thus, a major chal-
lenge in the design of our online experiment was to engage users
so that they would attempt to make the best use of their judgment
when making decisions involving trust. To capture attention and
provide incentives for the exertion of good judgment, we offered
100 prizes, each for 100 US dollars (USD). The chances of win-
ning were proportional to the number of credits accumulated in
the investment game.

We generated each of the potential receivers according to
prescribed rules. We placed the receivers’ profiles at social dis-
tance d from the participant, defined in the context of Blau’s
social space as the number of features on which two individu-
als differ (6). This is equivalent to the mathematical definition of
Hamming distance. Accordingly, distance d= 0 meant that the
receiver matched all of the demographic attributes of the partici-
pant (e.g., the same age group, the same gender, the same marital
status, and the same US state). In turn, d = 1 meant that one ran-
domly selected feature’s category differed from that of the par-
ticipant. The profile at d = 2 is strictly farther from the partici-
pant by having one additional randomly selected feature changed
to a different category. Lastly, d =4 meant that the profile had
all of the demographic features in a different category from
those of the participant. The receivers were placed at distances
d=0,1,2, and two of them were placed at d=4. We showed
the five profiles simultaneously on the participant’s screen in ran-
dom order.

In addition to demographics, the generated profiles included
two reputation features—namely, the average number of star
ratings and the number of reviews on Airbnb. The star rating

PNAS | September 12,2017 | vol. 114 | no. 37 | 9849

SOCIAL SCIENCES
i _—_—_—

wt

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Univ of Haifa on November 22, 2022 from Tce A PNAS | |

is a postinteraction subjective evaluation of an alter. It consists
of the assignment of zero to five stars, where the number of stars
is proportional to the degree of positiveness. The ratings a mem-
ber receives are averaged over all of their raters, rounded to the
half unit, and presented in the member’s profile on the platform.
Similarly, an interaction grants the two parties the opportunity to
mutually provide free-form written reviews. Due to the difficulty
of manipulating textual contents of reviews experimentally, we
restricted our attention to the number of reviews a user received.

We manipulated these two dimensions in a structured way to
study their effects on trust. Among the five profiles participants
saw on the screen, four had reputation features with similar val-
ues, chosen independently at random for each participant’s ses-
sion, which we refer to as the baseline reputation. These were
the profiles at social distances d=0,1,2 and one of the pro-
files at d=4. The other generated profile at distance d= 4 had
one of the reputation features randomly selected to be switched
to either a better or a worse value than baseline (see Game
Design Details for how we manipulated the numerical values of
reputation). For convenience, we refer to the profile that has a
different reputation feature than the baseline as being at dist-
ance d=5.

We randomly assigned users to two possible worlds. In world
1, the profile at d =5 not only had the largest distance from the
participant, but also a weaker reputation than all other profiles
(the baseline reputation). In this case, reputation did not com-
pete with the tendency toward homophily. In world 2, the pro-
file at d =5 had a better reputation than the baseline reputation.
This induced a tension between placing trust in the most distant
profile with a better reputation or in the other profiles closer to
the participant in social space. Fig. $1 shows a partial view of the
screen users see in the experiment, and Fig. S2 shows a diagram
that exemplifies the structure of a user’s session.

We gave participants a single “wallet” with 100 credits, which
they could keep or invest in receivers in whatever way they chose.
Therefore, participants could gain or lose credits through their
investments. Because this was a one-time game, it was easy to
show that the Nash equilibrium was not to invest any amount,
since the dominant strategy for receivers was not to return any
amount. (Nevertheless, we observed such rational behavior only
in rare instances.)

It is argued that risk is a component of trust in general, and
some definitions of trust include risk (8). Even though previous
research has attempted to relate trust and risk, the empirical evi-

 

   

 

 

 

A World 1
205
3 :
2 Reputation
g
& [ ] Baseline
oO
@
| |
Os
Savings 0 1 2 4 5
Distance from the participant
Fig. 1.

dence of the connection between risk attitudes and trust has been
weak (17). Moreover, research that has addressed this question
has been limited to laboratory experiments or small datasets.
Given the opportunity to study this question using a large
population, we introduced a risk-assessment question before the
investment game. We worded the question as: “A lottery ticket
costs 100 (USD) and people win with 50% chance. How much
should the prize be for you to choose to buy a ticket?” Players
could enter any numerical value, which corresponded to the min-
imum reward that would make the participant take the risk of buy-
ing a ticket. The prize value 200 (USD) had the expected value
of net gain equal to zero (after paying off the ticket) and corre-
sponded to the minimum rational value. Thus, values >200 (USD)
measured risk aversion proportional to their magnitude. In Risk
Assessment Question, we summarize the distribution of answers
(Table $1) and argue that our measure captures risk behaviors in
accordance with previous research (Table $5) (19, 20).

Multilevel-Multivariate Analysis

We had five measurements (investments) on each observational
unit (participant). As a result, the five investments were cor-
related, which we accounted for by nesting investments within
subjects in a multilevel model. We fitted the model using a
multivariate regression with 10 independent variables, one for
each investment in the combination (d,w) of profile distance
d:{0,1,2,4,5} and world w: {1,2}. The investments a partic-
ipant made had different sources of mutual correlation. For
instance, the sum of the investments had to be at most 100 credits.
We accounted for these by computing the model fit with an uncon-
strained covariance structure that learned from the data the cor-
relations and independent variances across measurements (21).

As a first-order approximation, we fitted the empty model (i-e.,
without explanatory variables) with 10 intercepts. The five inter-
cepts for each world corresponded to the average distribution
of investments among the five profiles across all participants
(complete pooling). Fig. 1 shows a plot of the mean estimates,
together with the mean number of credits saved, for worlds 1
and 2. Table S6, model 1 shows the numerical estimates from the
model fit.

We were mainly interested in the additive effect of the number
of different coordinates between two individuals’ feature vectors,
or their Hamming distance. However, any real-world sociode-
mographic feature inevitably produces heterogeneous effects on
trust (e.g., gender may affect investments more than marital

B World 2

1 2 4 6

Savings 0
Distance from the participant

 

N
So

Reputation

Baseline

Higher

Average invested
3

    

Os

 

 

 

Empty model estimates of average investment in profile at distance d and average savings. (A) In world 1, the second profile at distance d = 4 (here

identified as ¢ = 5) has a worse reputation than baseline. (8) In world 2, the profile at distance d =5 has a better reputation than the baseline.

9850 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas. 16042341 14

Abrahao et al.
i _—_—_—

f

wa

 

status does), and Hamming distance by itself may not explain all
of the variance in the investments. Thus, to take these effects into
account, we extended the empty model by including explanatory
variables.

Table S7 shows a list of the inputs we used to form these
covariates. They can be categorized into three sets structured in
a multilevel model as: () level 1 variables corresponding to the
profile’s characteristics, annotated with “P”; (ii) level 2 variables
corresponding to the participant’s (or subject’s) characteristics,
annotated with “S”; and (i) the cross-level interactions between
the level 1 and 2 variables.

We expected that the demographic features we used to increase
social distance could have resulted in effects rooted in prefer-
ences, which are not necessarily biases, such as preferences for
“female,” “married,” or “older” as indicators of perceived trust-
worthiness. Thus, the cross-level interactions aimed to control for
these effects.

The multivariate model estimated the effects associated with
the covariates specifically for each dependent variable (d, w).
This allowed us to show the effects of each explanatory variable
on trust in each of the five profiles (in each of the worlds) sepa-
rately. In the case of cross-level interactions, this was not always
possible due to the symmetries in the participant’s session. For
example, all profiles at d=0 exactly matched the participant’s
gender, marital status, and region. In these cases, we estimated
joint effects on the investments in the five profiles simultaneously
(by world). In Table S8 we present an alternative analysis of the
data based on McFadden’s choice model (22).

Note that the intercepts of the full model are consistent with
those in the empty model, up to estimation errors (Table S6,
models 1, 2, and 3). Thus, we used this estimate of the distri-
bution of mean investment over the profiles as a starting point
and studied how the explanatory variables changed these values.

Fig. 2 presents the effects of these covariates (integer-valued
variables were centered and standardized to make all coeffi-
cients comparable). Negative values reduce average investments,

whereas positive values increase them. Our main goal was to
show that the heterogeneity of the features did not significantly
alter the main effects we observed on average investments as a
function of d in the empty multivariate model.

Results

Fig. 14 shows that homophily dominated investment decisions.
That is, the farther away the profile was on the demographic
dimensions from the participants, the lower the investment they
received, on average. Furthermore, the profile at d=5 with
worse reputation received less investment on average than the
equivalent alternative with respect to social distance (ie., the
profile at d= 4). Quite strikingly, Fig. 1B shows that reputation
builds trust beyond homophily. The average investment in the
profile at d =5, possessing the best reputation, was significantly
higher than the average invested in all of the closest profiles.
Note that despite the strong influence of the reputation system
in world 2, the magnitude of the investments in the profiles with
baseline reputation was still driven by homophily.

The explanatory variables exhibited variance beyond that
explained by social distance, which implies that there are differ-
ences in investment behavior by demographic group and their
interactions. However, as we argue next, the changes in the aver-
age investments (model intercepts) that these effects produced
in the multivariate model were not strong enough to significantly
alter the conclusions regarding homophily and reputation that
we previously derived from the empty model.

Homophily Is at Work. The covariate “profile distance” was by far
the dominant one with respect to variance explained (F value
5668.8, P < 0.001). This was followed by the number of reviews
with a much smaller F value (26.1, P < 0.001).

The dashed lines in Fig. 2 have the values £1.37 and corre-
spond, in the most conservative way, to the smallest difference
in average investment between two profiles with baseline rep-
utation, minus two standard errors. That is, a coefficient that

 

 

(8) male

(8) female, (P) male

(8) male, (P) male

(8) single

(8) married , (P) single

(8) single, (P) single

(P) age

(P) age - (S) age

_. Variable

P) age * ((P) age ~ (S) age)

(P) log(reviews)

(P) rating = 4

(P) rating = 5

(8) risk in (500,1000)

(8) risk in (1004 ,10000)

(8) risk in (100014)

 

 

 

Joint Effect

 

 

 

 

 

 

Coefficient

Fig. 2.

The effects of the covariates associated with the participant (S} and profiles (P) in the multivariate multilevel model. The dashed lines have the

values + 1.37, which correspond to the smallest average investment difference between two profiles with baseline reputation, minus two standard errors.

Abrahao et al.

PNAS | September 12,2017 | vol. 114 | no. 37 | 9851

SOCIAL SCIENCES
i _—_—_—

f

Xe

aw

:

132

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Univ of Haifa on November 22, 2022 from IP address

    
  

exceeds these boundaries potentially produces an effect that
could alter the conclusions we derived from the empty model.
A first glance at Fig. 2 reveals that most of the coefficients are
contained within these boundaries.

Fig. 2 shows that participant’s gender “(S) male” in both
worlds had small positive effects on all profiles. Marital status
“(S) single” had effects that were not significantly different from
zero. For age, the older the profiles [“(P) age”], the more credits
they received. One SD (14 y) above the mean (39.7) had positive
effects for all of the profiles with coefficients ranging from 0.93
(0.44) to 2.29 (0.81). The effects associated with region had small
values that varied together across different profiles (omitted in
Fig. 2 for clarity).

As these effects changed the investments roughly uniformly
across the profiles, these effects did not cause significant changes
in the differences between the investment means.

We note that the preceding effects did not change homophily
trends due to the inclusion of interaction effects between partic-
ipants’ characteristics and those of the profile in the model. In
Fig. 2, these variables are labeled with both S and P, such as “(S)
female, (P) male” for gender. Recall that we included these inter-
actions to capture preferences that are not necessarily biases.
Indeed, in both worlds, male profiles received on average up to
3.38 (0.50) fewer credits than females, while not married profiles
received on average up to 2.50 (0.40) fewer credits than mar-
ried profiles. Age difference exhibited a nonlinear relationship.
As the profiles got older than the participant, homophily came
into play, and the positive effect of the profile’s age decreased
significantly, as indicated by the interaction of profile’s age with
the age difference between the profile and the subject.

Without controlling for these preferences (no interaction
effects), the model exhibited effects associated with demographic
features that canceled out the homophily effects produced by
social distance in the case of males or singles. For illustration,
in Table S6, we included the effects of gender and marital status
for the models that included the interactions (model 3) and that
with interactions removed (model 2).

As the group effects of investment behavior were not large
enough to alter the trends produced by profile distance, we show
evidence that homophily figures as a major driving force, struc-
turing decisions of whom to trust with investments.

Trust via Reputation. We first focus on the effects of reviews in
Fig. 2. In world 1, an increase in the log-transformed number
of reviews, “(P) reviews (log)” resulted in a statistically indistin-
guishable increase in mean investment in profiles with baseline
reputation, between 2.03 (0.47) and 3.20 (0.36) credits. Although
the profile at d =5 in this world always had fewer reviews than
baseline, the variation in its number of reviews did not affect
the average investment it received. In contrast, in world 2, an
increase in the number of reviews increased the mean invest-
ment in the profile at d=5, with the best reputation by 5.42

(0.52) credits. Symmetric to world 1, the change in the number
of reviews of the baseline reputation did not affect the average
investment in these profiles.

Comparing the effects of number of reviews between the two
worlds, we see that high reputation resulted in larger investment
increases in cases in which holding the best reputation was an
exception among the alternatives (world 2). Surprisingly, these
exceptions were the profiles that were the farthest away from the
participants in the social space.

The coefficient of the joint effect estimated for variable “(P)
rating = 4” represented an increase of 1.74 (0.83) and 1.13 (0.37)
credits for worlds 1 and 2, respectively, in mean investment (ref-
erence “no rating available”). The corresponding increases for
profiles with five-star ratings, “(P) rating = 5,” was 2.21 (0.82)
and 0.99 (0.36) for worlds 1 and 2, respectively. This shows that
varying between 4 and 5 stars did not cause a significant differ-
ence in average investment, as participants may have considered
them equally high.

In the full model of world 1, the difference between the
mean investments comparing the profile with baseline reputation
receiving the smallest average investment (d = 4) and the profile
at d = 5 with the lowest reputation was 5.73 (1.89). In world 2, the
difference between the profile with baseline reputation receiv-
ing the largest mean investment (d =0) and the profile at d=5
with the best reputation was 15.46 (1.68). In Fig. 2, we see that
none of the effects were large enough to cancel out the shifts
produced by reputation and alter our conclusion with respect to
trust increases (world 2) or reductions (world 1). This shows evi-
dence that the reputation system is a strong signal that shifts trust
beyond homophily, thereby overriding the effects of assessments
of social distance.

Risk. Fig. 2 shows the effects of answers to the risk-assessment
question on the investments in each profile. We grouped
responses by ranges, where the higher the range, the more risk-
averse we classified a participant to be. These are the covariates
with prefix “(S) risk in range,” where the reference level is the
range [200, 400], the low end of rational values.

In world 1, we saw little or no effect associated with risk atti-
tudes on the investments in any of the profiles, except for small
negative effects on the investments in those with baseline repu-
tation and weak similarity with the participant (d =2 and d = 4).
The effects ranged from a reduction of —1.74 (0.61) to —2.85
(0.48) in average investments, with slightly stronger effects pro-
portional to the level of risk aversion.

The most striking results were related to world 2. In this case,
risk attitudes did not correlate with the average investments in
any of the profiles, except in the profile at d = 5 (with significance
P <0.001). These effects were among the strongest we found
(Fig. 2, Right, the bottom three items). The decrease in mean
investment ranged between 3.91 (0.75) and 8.16 (0.71) and was
inversely proportional to the degree of risk aversion. This shows

 

Average Star Rating in (4.5,4.9] Average Star Rating in (4.9,5.0]

 

 

 

 

Average Star Rating in [0.0,4.0] Average Star Rating in (4.0,4.5]
0.80 =
8
£
2
oa
075+
oO
8
2 z
fe 0.70 4 | | { I z I }
go
2 ae
=

 

 

 

 

 

 

0 4 2 3 5 0% 0 OF 1 2 3 5 10

10 0 1 2 38 5 10 10 0 1 2 3 § 10 100

Number of reviews

Fig. 3.
greater diversity of guests who selected them (y axis).

9852 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.16042341 14

Real-world data from Airbnb show that an increased reputation of the host in the form of rating (graph) and number of reviews (x axis) results in

Abrahao et al.
 

 

at)
a
a
o
e
|
3
S
ay
a
EI
g
net
a
a
S
a
at
a
he
vo
3
EI
uo
J
6
Z
=
6
&
a
oc
Se
3
B
=
~
>
5
0
Q
S
a
g
=
Sy
2
2
2
=
a
&
a
&|
g
ee
2
uo
3
S
g
<
2
6
Qa

that risk aversion was not correlated with reduced trust in gen-
eral; restricted to the case of high reputation, trust had a strongly
negative correlation with risk aversion. The more risk-averse the
participant, the less they trusted the positive information pro-
vided by the reputation system. Interestingly, risk aversion did
not seem to correlate with distrust in negative reputations.

Real-World Data Analysis. The intuitions we gained from the exper-
iment suggested that reliance on reputation may reduce the user’s
attention to the number of dimensions in which their partner’s
demographic characteristics differ when they select a host or a
guest. In the experimental data, we had access to every option the
participant considered and the degree of preference for every pair
of them. Although this is not possible to observe from Airbnb’s
internal database of historical interactions, we sought to use the
insights gained through the experiment to guide a real-world,
large-scale data analysis and extract the same intuition.

On Airbnb, guests are the active participants in the social
selection process. They select partners through searching and
making a request. We studied 1 million requests to stay by guests
taking place over the same period as the study. For purposes of
this analysis, we considered two dimensions of social distance:
age and gender. (Airbnb does not collect marital status, and the
hospitality interactions usually occur between users from distinct
locations.)

For each of these demographic features, we coded distance as
0 if values for hosts and guests were available and equal, and
1 otherwise. We considered two ages equal if they were within
10 y of each other. (We repeated the analysis using different age
thresholds within which we considered two people as belong-
ing to the same age group, namely 3, 5, 10, and 20 y. Across
the different experiments, the absolute values of social distance
changed, but the trends did not.)

Fig. 3 shows how the average social distance between guests
and hosts varied, conditioned on the number of reviews and
on the star rating of the host at the time of booking request.
Strikingly, the intuition we derived in the experiment held in
the actual platform. We saw a trend for the average social dis-
tance to increase, which became clearer as the number of reviews
(within each graph in Fig. 3) and ratings (across graphs in Fig.
3) changed. Note that this effect is not simply explained by
an increased number of interactions—we did not see a signifi-
cant increase in social distance for hosts with a large number of

. Stein J Ganuary 29, 2015) Baby, you can drive my car, and do my errands, and rent
my stuff. Time. Available at http://time.com/magazine/us/3687 285/february-9th-2015-
vol-185-no-4-u-s/. Accessed August 9, 2017.

. Simmel G (1955) Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliation (The Free Press, New York).

. Lazarsfeld P, Merton R, (1954) Friendship as a social process: A substantive and

methodological analysis. Freedom and Control in Modern Society, eds Berger M,

Abel T, Page C (Van Nostrand, New York), pp 18-66.

McPherson M (1983) An ecology of affiliation. Am Socio Rev 48:519-532.

. McPherson M, Smith-lovin L, Cook JM (2001) Birds of a feather: Homophily in social

networks. Annu Rev Saciol 27:415-444.

Blau P {1977} A macrosociological theory of social structure. Am J Socio! 83:26-54.

. Resnick P, Kuwabara K, Zeckhauser R, Friedman E (2000) Reputation systems. Commun

ACM 43:45-48.

Earle T (2010) Trust in risk management: A model-based review of empirical research.

Risk Anal 30:541-574.

. Snijders C, Weesie J (2009) Online programming markets. eTrust: Forming Relation-
ships in the Online World, The Russell Sage Foundation Series on Trust, (Russell Sage,
New York), pp 166-186.

10. Houser D, Wooders J (2006) Reputation in auctions: Theory, and evidence from eBay.
4 Econ Manag Strat 15:353-369.

. Lin T, Abrahao B, Kleinberg R, Lui J, Chen W (2014) Combinatorial partial monitor-
ing game with linear feedback and its applications. Proceedings of the 31st Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
Beijing).

12. State B, Abrahao B, Cook K (2012) From power to status in online exchange. Proceed-
ings of the 4th ACM Int'l Conference on Web Science (Association for Computing
Machinery, New York).

13. State B, Abrahao B, Cook K (2016) Power imbalance and rating systems. Proceedings

of the 10th International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, Cologne, Ger-

many (AAAI Press, Palo Alto, CA).

wn

5

uw

~o

~

o

Abrahao et al.

reviews and low ratings (Fig. 3, first graph). This shows that our
experimental findings were not simply an artifact of our online
laboratory, but that our main conclusions generalized to patterns
found in real interactions. That is, as high reputation tends to
shrink social distance, we saw higher tolerance for individuals at
farther social distances between guests and their selected hosts
as the reputation of the host got better.

Discussion

Companies operating in the sharing economy are predicated on
trust, but cannot rely directly on preexisting institutional arrange-
ments. Our work shows evidence that the reputation system of
Airbnb, and by extension of sharing-economy sites—the star rat-
ings and the number of reviews—may operate to bridge the gap
between institutionally generated trust and the organically grown
trust present in social platforms. Although we gathered evidence
for the tendency of individuals to trust similar others, by trusting
the reputation system, participants in our study were willing to
extend trust to those who exhibited a high degree of dissimilarity
in the social space.

While we present evidence that these effects are at work in
the actual Airbnb platform, our experimental results are lim-
ited to the specific population that participated in our study.
Moreover, although we found very sizable effects associated
with homophily, we emphasize that the inclusion of other demo-
graphic characteristics not displayed explicitly by the platform,
but that can be inferred indirectly through pictures or other
signals—such as nationality, race, class, religion, ethnicity, etc.—
could lead to the observation of even greater effects. For exam-
ple, the literature suggests that racial features play a significant
role in determining trust (23, 24).

Materials and Methods

Our experimental methods were reviewed and approved by Stanford Univer-
sity’s Internal Review Board (protocol 34470, approved on August 11, 2015).
We required invitees to provide us with consent to participate in the study,
whose terms we displayed on the entry page of our experiment’s website.

See Supporting information for detailed information on our sample, an
analysis of self-selection, and more information on our research design and
data analysis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was supported by National Science Foun-
dation Grant 1257138 (to B.A., PP, and K.S.C.).

14. Parigi P, State B (2014) Disenchanting the world: The impact of technology on rela-
tionships. Social inform 1:166-182.

15. Cook K, Cooper R (2003) Experimental studies of cooperation, trust, and social
exchange. Trust and Reciprocity: Interdisciplinary Lessons for Experimental Research,
eds Ostrom E, Walker J (Russell Sage, New York}, pp 209-244.

16. Berg J, Dickhaut J, McCabe K (1995) Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Games Econ
Behav 10:122-142.

17. Houser D, Schunk D, Winter J (2010) Distinguishing trust from risk: An anatomy of
the investment game. J Econ Behav Organ 74:72-81.

18. Poundstone W (1992) Prisoner's Dilemma (Doubleday, New York).

19. Weber E, Blais A, Betz E (2002) A domain-specific risk-attitude scale: Mea-
suring risk perceptions and risk behaviors. 4 Behav Decis Making 15:263-
290.

20. Gneezy U, Potters J (1997) An experiment on risk taking and evaluation periods. QJ

Econ 112:631-645.

Pinheiro J, Bates DM (2000) Mixed-Effects Models in S$ and S-PLUS (Springer,

New York).

22. McFadden D (1974) Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. Frontiers
in Econometrics, ed Zarembka P (Academic, New York), pp 105-142.

23. Edelman B, Luca M (2005) Digital discrimination: The case of airbnb.com.
SSRN. (Harvard Business School, Boston} Harvard Business School Working Paper
14-054.

24. Smith S (2010) Race and trust. Annu Rev Socio! 36:453-75.

25. Fausto-Sterling A (1992) Myths of Gender: Biological Theories About Women and
Men (Basic, New York).

26. Zervas G, Proserpio D, Byers J (2015) A first look at online reputation on Airbnb, where
every stay is above average. SSRN. Available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2554500.
Accessed August 9, 2017.

27. Santana J, Parigi P (2015) Risk aversion and engagement in the sharing economy.
Games 6:560-573.

21.

PNAS | September 12,2017 | vol. 114 | no. 37 | 9853

SOCIAL SCIENCES
