Cognition 171 (2018) 194-201

 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

   

Cognition

 

 

ELSEVIER

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cognit

 

Original Articles

Social biases modulate the loss of redundant forms in the cultural evolution ®
of language coals

Gareth Roberts***', Maryia Fedzechkina’““"'

= Department of Linguistics, University of Pennsylvania, United States

> Department of Linguistics, University of Arizona, United States

“ Graduate Interdisciplinary Program in Cognitive Science, University of Arizona, United States

4 Graduate Interdisciplinary Program in Second Language Acquisition and Teaching, University of Arizona, United States

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

 

According to the competitive exclusion principle (Gause, 1934), competition for the same niche must eventually
lead one competitor to extinction or the occupation of a new niche. This principle applies in both biology and the
cultural evolution of language, where different words and structures compete for the same function or meaning
(Aronoff, 2016). Across languages, for example, word order trades off with case marking as a means of indicating
who did what to whom in a sentence. Previous experimental work has shed light on how such trade-offs come

Keywords:

Language change
Learning biases

Social biases

Iterated language learning
Cultural evolution

Artificial language learning about as languages adapt to human biases through learning and production, with biases becoming amplified

through iterated learning over generations. At the same time, a large body of work has documented the impact of
social biases on language change. However, little work has investigated how social biases interact with learning
and production biases. In particular, the social dimension of language may provide alternative niches for
otherwise redundant forms, preventing or slowing their extinction. We tested this hypothesis in an iterated-
learning experiment in which participants were exposed to a language with two dialects, both of which had fixed
word order, but differed in whether they employed case markers. In one condition, we biased participants
socially towards speakers of the dialect that employed case; in other conditions we provided no bias, or biased
participants for or against the dialect without case. As expected under our hypothesis, the use of case markers
declined over time in all conditions, but the social bias in favor of case-dialect speakers slowed the decline.

 

1. Introduction

In language there is often more than one way to say the same thing
(Labov, 1972). Indeed, the arbitrariness of linguistic form-meaning
mappings means that words can vary infinitely in form: The words
dinner, vecheria, swper, Abendessen, cena, wanfan, for instance, represent
a tiny subset of the many words that exist for the evening meal. But this
variation is constrained. In the case of individual words, it is vanish-
ingly rare to find perfect synonyms. For example, dinner and supper
might refer to the same meal in different dialects, but almost never
carry exactly the same meaning for the same speaker — suggesting that
it is very hard for two different words to occupy the same semantic
niche (Taylor, 2002, p. 471). This phenomenon can be understood in
evolutionary terms with reference to the competitive exclusion prin-
ciple, according to which two competing entities cannot coexist in-
definitely in the same niche (Gause, 1934; Hardin, 1960). The result of
competition is either that one of the forms drives the other to extinction

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: gareth.roberts@ling. upenn.edu (G. Roberts).
2 Both authors contributed equally to this work.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.11.005

(as with English yes and no versus yea and nay) or that they come to
occupy different niches, as with regal, royal and kingly (see Aronoff,
2016, for a discussion of the competitive exclusion principle in lan-
guage).

As with the lexicon, the grammars of natural languages exhibit both
variation between languages and competition between different struc-
tures within the same language. For example, languages differ in their
preferred order of the subject and object in simple transitive sentences
and in the amount of flexibility they allow in ordering these con-
stituents (Dryer & Haspelmath, 2013). Latin and Russian are examples
of languages with relatively flexible word order, while English and
French are examples of languages with relatively fixed word order.
Within a language, word order competes with other cues to gramma-
tical role assignment (i.e., who is doing what to whom in a sentence).
The most obvious competitor is morphological case marking (i.e.,
changes to the form of certain categories of words to indicate their
grammatical role), though the same information can also be conveyed

Received 27 July 2017; Received in revised form 10 November 2017; Accepted 10 November 2017

Available online 11 December 2017
0010-0277/ © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
G. Roberts, M. Fedzechkina

by such means as agreement, prosody, or pragmatics (van Everbroeck,
2003). Importantly, no language uses all of these means at the same
time. In fact, cues to grammatical role assignment have long been ob-
served to trade off across languages, with case marking and word order
providing a good example (Blake, 2001, p. 15; Sapir, 1921, p. 66). In
the Modern English sentence Brutus killed Caesar, word order un-
ambiguously conveys who did the killing. In Latin, however, Brutus
Caesarem interfecit and Caesarem Brutus interfecit both mean “Brutus
killed Caesar”, and it is the case markers on Caesar and Brutus that
indicate their grammatical roles. Further support for the existence of
this trade-off comes from language change. In later Latin, for instance,
case marking became less consistent and word order became more
fixed, so that the modern Romance languages typically exhibit rela-
tively fixed SVO word order and little case (Kabatek & Pusch, 2011). A
similar process occurred in the history of English (Marchand, 1951).

The trade-off between cues to grammatical role assignment has been
argued to stem from a trade-off between robust message transmission —
the speaker’s goal to be understood - and production effort
(Fedzechkina, Jaeger, & Newport, 2012, 2016; Kurumada & Jaeger,
2015). In languages with relatively fixed word order, grammatical role
assignment can usually be inferred based on word order alone, ren-
dering case marking redundant. In flexible-word-order languages,
however, case provides important information about sentence meaning,
as word order is less informative of grammatical role assignment. As
case marking requires effort to produce, the implication is that lan-
guages evolve culturally such that case marking is maintained pre-
dominantly in those languages when its utility is high (i.e., those with
flexible word order). Experimental support for this claim comes from
work using the miniature artificial language learning paradigm. For
example, Fedzechkina et al. (2016) showed that participants introduced
cross-linguistic patterns of case and word order trade-offs into novel
miniature languages if the input grammars were not consistent with
such trade-offs. In particular, learners of a miniature language with
flexible word order were more likely to maintain case marking in their
own productions, while learners of a language with fixed word order
tended to drop it.

Work on cumulative cultural evolution has linked the cognitive
biases influencing individual learners to long-term patterns of language
change. This work suggests that even small learning and production
biases that are too weak to be detected in one generation of learners can
have sizeable effects on the linguistic system over multiple generations
(Kirby, Griffiths, & Smith, 2014). Supporting evidence for this claim
comes in particular from studies using the iterated-learning paradigm,
in which the linguistic output of one learner is used as the input for
another learner, who is either a simulated agent (e.g., Kirby, 1999;
Reali & Griffiths, 2009) or a human participant (e.g., Kirby, Tamariz,
Cornish, & Smith, 2015; Smith & Wonnacott, 2010).

The linguistic system is also subject to a range of social biases
alongside the learning and production biases discussed above (Labov,
2001). One’s choice of name for the evening meal, for example, may
communicate more than which meal is being referred to: In certain
parts of Great Britain and Ireland, the use of “tea” in this sense is as-
sociated with working-class speakers and thus implies different things
about the speaker’s origins and social identity than the more middle-
class option, “dinner”. Over the last century a large body of work has
documented the important role of social factors in language change
(Bailey, Cameron, & Lucas, 2013; Labov, 2001), including the role of
local identity (e.g., Pope, Meyerhoff, & Ladd, 2007), ethnicity
(Lanehart, 2015), gender (Holmes & Meyerhoff, 2003), and class
(Rampton, 2010).

While the impact of social factors on language change has also been
acknowledged by researchers taking an explicitly cultural-evolutionary
approach (e.g., Croft, 2000), experimental work on the cultural evo-
lution of language has primarily focused on the role of learning and
production biases in language change (e.g., Fedzechkina et al., 2016;
Kirby et al., 2015) and has paid relatively little attention to the role of

195

Cognition 171 (2018) 194-201

social biases. This is unfortunate, as social and non-social biases are
likely to interact, jointly shaping the process of language change. For
example, we know from previous experimental work (Fedzechkina
et al., 2016) that, as a result of biases for efficient communication,
learners of miniature languages are more likely to drop redundant case
markers if word order is fixed than if it is flexible. However, such
change tends to lead to variation between speakers (because some
adopt the change sooner than others), and this variation provides raw
material for social meaning. That is, if there is more than one way of
saying the same thing, one of those ways may acquire social sig-
nificance. This, in turn, might influence the trajectory of language
change so that it differs from what we would predict based on learning
and production biases alone. A natural-language example of this seems
to be provided by English whom, the object form of who. In modern
English, whom has become redundant and competes with who in the
object position. In evolutionary terms, its niche has been invaded by a
clearly fitter competitor: Outside some narrow contexts in formal
written English, who is acceptable everywhere that whom is, and a
speaker who does not acquire whom is at no serious disadvantage. The
reverse is not true. So why has whom not disappeared yet? One possi-
bility suggested by the competitive exclusion principle (Aronoff, 2016;
Gause, 1934) is that it has found a new niche. A word like whom tends
to be associated with more educated speakers (cf. Milroy & Milroy,
2012), and may thus serve as a means of signaling group identity,
which may slow its disappearance from the linguistic system.

The purpose of this paper is to experimentally test the hypothesis
that social biases can interact with learning and production biases
during the cultural evolution of language, modulating the loss of a re-
dundant form (such as case marking in a language with fixed word
order) that would otherwise be expected to disappear. In evolutionary
terms, the question is whether a form under threat from a fitter com-
petitor for the same communicative niche (such as word order in later
Latin, which — by becoming more fixed — had become a more in-
formative cue) will survive longer if it has a new social niche - e.g., a
desirable social meaning — to take refuge in. We tested this hypothesis
using a miniature artificial language learning paradigm, which has been
shown to be well-suited to studying both the influences of individual-
level biases on language structure (Culbertson, Smolensky, & Legendre,
2012; Fedzechkina et al., 2012; Hupp, Sloutsky, & Culicover, 2009; see
Fedzechkina, Newport, & Jaeger, 2016, for a review) and the role of
social biases in language change (Samara, Smith, Brown, & Wonnacott,
2017; Sneller & Roberts, 2018; see Roberts, 2017, for a review).

In our study, participants learned a miniature “alien language” with
fixed word order. The language had two dialects (indexed by the color
of the alien speakers), one of which consistently employed redundant
case marking, while the other had no case marking at all. We ma-
nipulated social biases acting on participants by varying the informa-
tion provided about the different alien groups, encouraging participants
to feel positively or negatively oriented towards one color of alien
compared with the other (cf. Labov, 1963). This yielded four conditions
in total: first, a condition biasing participants towards the aliens who
used case markers; second, a condition biasing participants against the
aliens who used case markers; third, a condition biasing participants
towards the aliens who did not use case markers; and, fourth, a control
condition with no bias towards either alien group. We simulated the
generational transmission of language by using iterated learning, in
which the output of learners is used to generate the input to other
learners, creating “chains” of participants (Kirby et al., 2014). Given
that case marking was in constant competition with word order, and
taking into account evidence from previous work for a bias against
maintaining excessive redundancy (Fedzechkina et al., 2016), we ex-
pected that the case markers would disappear from the language over
time. We predicted, however, that this process would be modulated by
social biases, and that the redundant case marking would persist over
more generations when there was a social bias to feel positively or-
iented towards the group of aliens who used case in their dialect.
G. Roberts, M. Fedzechkina

2. Method
2.1. Participants

A total of 359 participants were recruited online via Amazon
Mechanical Turk using a custom-designed flash applet developed by
Hal Tily (Tily, Frank, & Jaeger, 2011). All participants had US IP ad-
dresses and were self-reported speakers of North-American English.
They received $4 for their participation in the experiment, which lasted
approximately 35 min. Some participants’ data were discarded and re-
placed by new data; this occurred for two separate reasons. First, 108
participants were replaced due to low learning accuracy (see Section
2.3.2 for details). Second, owing to an oversight, several participants
took part in the experiment more than once. The data from their first
participations were kept, but the data from all subsequent participa-
tions, along with the data from later generations of the same chains,
were discarded and new participants recruited. This led to the re-
placement of data from 51 participants in total. The final sample sub-
mitted for analysis included 200 participants.

2.2. Miniature input language

Participants were instructed that they would be learning a novel
miniature “alien” language with the help of alien informants (two for
each dialect), by watching short videos accompanied by their descrip-
tions in the novel language (presented both auditorily and in writing).
The language contained 11 novel words (Table 1): six nouns referring to
humanoid characters (CHEF, REFEREE, BANDIT, CONDUCTOR,
HUNTER, MOUNTIE), four transitive verbs (TAP, HUG, KICK, ROCK),
and a case marker ‘di’ that followed the object in the sentence. The
lexicon was adopted from Fedzechkina, Chu, and Jaeger (in press).
Individual words were synthesized separately using the Apple speech
synthesizer (voice ‘Alex’) and were concatenated into sentences in real
time during the experiment. To prevent unwanted associations that
could interfere with learning, the assignment of novel word labels to
lexical items was rotated across two randomly generated lists, such
that, for instance, peza meant “chef” for some participants and “con-
ductor” for others (see Supplementary materials). All nouns occurred
equally often in the subject and object position with each verb.

The language had two “dialects”. In the first generation, both dia-
lects had fixed subject-object-verb (SOV) constituent order. This order
was chosen because default SOV order commonly occurs with case
marking typologically (Dryer & Haspelmath, 2013). The dialects dif-
fered in one respect only: One dialect (the case dialect) had a case
marker ‘di’ that followed the object 100% of the time (there was no case
marker on the subject), while the other dialect (the no-case dialect) had
no case marking at all. The two dialects occurred equally frequently in
the input. Case marking was thus present in 50% of the input sentences
in the first generation. Since constituent order always perfectly dis-
ambiguated grammatical role assignment, case marking provided little
information about sentence meaning, but required effort to produce.

Participants were told explicitly that the language had two dialects,
and that one of the dialects was used by blue aliens, while the other was
used by orange aliens. Assignment of color to dialect was counter-
balanced across participants.

Table 1
Words of the miniature language, organized by part of speech.

 

 

Nouns Verbs Case marker
barsa skroop di

forpah velmik

doakla kyse

tizba tegud

koofta

peza

 

196

Cognition 171 (2018) 194-201

2.3. Procedure

2.3.1. Language learning task

At the start of the experiment participants read an introductory
scenario informing them that they were on a mission to an alien planet
and would be learning the language of the alien species living on the
planet. Participants were further informed that there were two different
groups of aliens on the planet, who could be identified by their color,
and that each group spoke a different dialect of the alien language.
Additional information was then provided about the different alien
groups depending on the experimental condition (see Section 2.4 and
Fig. 2). This introduction was followed by a miniature artificial lan-
guage learning task adapted from Fedzechkina et al. (2016), which
consisted of several blocks, as detailed below and in Fig. 1. In all blocks
of the experiment, the stimuli in the novel language were presented
both auditorily and in writing. The experiment lasted approximately
35 min in total.

Noun exposure. At the start of the experiment, participants were
presented with pictures of the six humanoid characters one at a time,
accompanied by their labels in the novel language. Each character was
presented twice, with the order of presentation randomized for each
participant.

Noun comprehension. Participants’ recognition of humanoid
character names was tested. Participants were presented with pictures
of two characters accompanied by an alien-language word referring to
one of them and were asked to click on the correct picture. Each
character was presented twice within the block. Participants did not
receive feedback on each trial, but they were provided with a summary
of their performance at the end of the block. Participants had to score at
least 90% correct on this block to move to the next block; otherwise
they had to repeat the noun exposure block.

Noun identification. Participants’ ability to identify the names of
the humanoid characters was tested. Each character was presented in
isolation (twice within the block in random order) along with the entire
lexicon of the language at the top of the screen. Participants were in-
structed to click on the alien word corresponding to the character's
name. As in the noun comprehension block, participants received a
summary of their performance at the end of the block. They were also
required to score at least 90% to move to the next block; otherwise they
had to repeat the noun exposure block.

Sentence exposure. Participants were shown short animations
depicting simple transitive events performed by characters on one an-
other, accompanied by sentences describing them in the alien language.
Every animation included a blue or an orange alien at the bottom of the
video as a cue to the dialect being used (Fig. 1). The sentence and
animation played concurrently. Participants could replay each anima-
tion (along with the sentence) as many times as they wanted by clicking
a “Replay“ button. The block included 24 different animations.

Sentence comprehension. Participants were shown two previously
seen animations depicting the same characters and action, but with the
actor in one of the videos taking the role of patient in the other. The
animations were accompanied by a single sentence in the novel lan-
guage, and participants were instructed to click on the animation that
corresponded to it. As in sentence exposure, each animation included
an alien as a cue to the dialect used. No feedback was provided at the
end of either the trial or the block.

Participants were presented with two sets of two sentence exposure
blocks and one sentence comprehension block (24 trials each). The
association between the animation and alien dialect (cued by alien
color) was counterbalanced across the blocks (e.g., an animation for
which participants heard the dialect of the blue aliens in the first and
third exposure blocks would be shown in the dialect of the orange aliens
in the second and fourth blocks).

Sentence production. Participants were shown the entire lexicon
of the language at the top of the screen (all nouns were shown as non-
case-marked and the case marker was shown as a separate word) and
G. Roberts, M. Fedzechkina

Noun exposure and tests

 

Exposure Comprehension

Cognition 171 (2018) 194-201

Fig. 1. Experimental procedure. Images te-
present screenshots of sample trials in each of
the experimental blocks. Arrows indicate the
succession of the blocks — the experiment started
with noun exposure and ended with sentence
production.

Identification

 

arse

  

Understand 1

‘Speak t
Lean
Lown 3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

rhe
fa)

 

 

 

Sentence exposure

 

Exposure (x2)

 

Comprehension

 

 

rizba forpah di skroop arp

   

7 Uederstand 7
‘Speak £
Learn 2

Tear 3
Urderstand 2
Learn 4

teams

Beviay

Continue | Repay

 

 

 

 

 

peza doakla vi tegud

a ea

Learn |

Tineierstand 1

 

‘uncerstand 3

 

 

 

 

 

Sentence production

 

tren 4) daha forpah koomta leyee pea
fieoe etreep tegud _valmik

 

 

 

 

 

asked to describe a series of previously unseen animations (24 in total)
by clicking on the corresponding lexical items. To simulate additional
effort associated with case production (in line with natural language,
where case use requires additional linguistic material), the case marker
was treated as a separate word (with its own button). Thus, case use
required one additional click compared to a non-case-marked noun.
There was no image of an alien as dialect cue in this block (Fig. 1). No
feedback or feedback summary was provided at the end of either the
trial or the block.

2.3.2. Iterated learning

In each condition, there were ten chains with a maximum of five
generations each, with two participants in each generation per chain
(yielding a total of 20 participants per generation). As described in
Section 2.2, participants in the first generation were taught a language
with 100% SOV word order, and two dialects, one in which the object
was always marked by the case marker di and one in which there was
no case marking. For later generations, the syntax of the case dialect

197

was generated based on the previous participants’ responses in the
sentence production block, with each participant’s responses being used
to generate the language for one alien informant (as noted above, there
were two alien informants for each dialect).

Because retention of the case marker was the main variable of in-
terest, it was important to be confident that the loss of case in a par-
ticipant’s productions was not simply due to a lack of attention during
training. Therefore, if a participant’s overall mean success rate in the
noun comprehension or noun identification block was below 50% —
implying poor attention to the learning task — their data were discarded
and a new participant recruited. The same was done if more than 25%
of a participant’s sentences during the sentence production block were
problematic, that is, did not consist of exactly three words (not counting
the case marker di), or contained a lexical error. In total, 108 partici-
pants were replaced based on these criteria.

For the participants who were not replaced, the proportions of dif-
ferent sentence patterns (e.g., SOV, SOcV, where c represents the case
marker di) were calculated based on non-problematic sentences in the
G. Roberts, M. Fedzechkina

No bias condition:

 

We are keen to trade with the aliens. They
seem to be on our side, and they have
important resources. We should try to
impress them.

 

 

Bias for case & Bias for no case conditions:

 

We are especially keen to trade with the blue
aliens. They seem to be on our side, and they
have important resources. We should try to
impress these blue aliens in particular. The
orange aliens are not so friendly, and they
don’t have much to offer us.

 

 

Bias against case condition:

 

We are especially reluctant to trade with the
blue aliens. We don’t think we can trust
them, and they have no _ important
resources. We should be very wary of these
blue aliens in particular. The orange aliens
are not as bad, but we don’t know if they have
much to offer us.

 

 

 

Fig. 2. Example instructions for experimental conditions. Relevant parts of the instruc-
tions are highlighted in bold for convenience (participants saw no highlighting). Note that
the color of alien that corresponded to a particular dialect (and was thus subject to a
particular bias) was counterbalanced.

sentence production block. For this purpose, sentences with a single
lexical error, in which word order could still be determined, were
counted towards the proportion. The proportions calculated from each
participant were used to generate the syntax of the case dialect for one
of the two alien informants in the next generation of the same chain.
Sentences in the no-case dialect were not based on the output of par-
ticipants, and simply had SOV word order with no case marker in every
generation. This was done to ensure that the case-dialect would always
be in competition with a dialect that consistently had no case marking.

Based on prior work (Smith & Wonnacott, 2010), participants were
recruited until there were five generations in each chain, or until case
marking had entirely disappeared. It is important to understand that
participants produced sentences by clicking on words that they had
been exposed to during training (with the case marker treated as a
separate word). This meant that, if neither member of a generation used
the case marker at all, it would not appear in training for the next
generation, and so would not be available during the sentence pro-
duction block for that generation. Thus, once case marking disappeared
in a chain, it could not reappear. In such cases no more participants
were recruited for that chain, and any later generations in the chain
were simply treated as having no case marker in the case use analysis.
There were 200 such “dummy” participants (50% of the data) in our
experiment.

2.4. Conditions

Participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions. In
the No bias condition, participants were made aware of the two alien

198

Cognition 171 (2018) 194-201

groups speaking different dialects but were not encouraged to feel more
or less positive about either alien group relative to the other. In two
other conditions a social bias was introduced in the experiment in-
structions to encourage participants to feel positively oriented towards
one group of aliens (see Fig. 2 for the instructions used in the experi-
ment). In the Bias for no case condition, participants were biased to-
wards the aliens who spoke the dialect with no redundant case marking.
In the Bias for case condition, participants were biased towards the
speakers of the dialect with redundant case marking. As Fig. 2 shows,
each of the biasing conditions not only introduced a social bias towards
one of the two alien groups, but also explicitly mentioned that group,
possibly making it more salient to the participants. Thus, learners of the
Bias for case condition might have been more likely to use case in their
own productions simply because our instructions prompted them to pay
more attention to the speech of the aliens speaking this dialect. To
control for this potential confound, we ran a fourth condition, the Bias
against case condition, in which we explicitly biased participants against
the dialect with case marking (while at the same time explicitly men-
tioning this group in the instructions). In all cases, the bias was ex-
pressed with respect to the color of the aliens in question, rather than
with respect to the dialect.

2.5. Predictions

Since case marking in the input language was a redundant cue to
grammatical role assignment, but required additional effort to produce
(involving an extra button press), we expected, in line with previous
work (Fedzechkina et al., 2016), that case markers would become less
frequent in all conditions, potentially leading to a system with con-
sistent zero-marking. We hypothesized, however, that this preference to
use case efficiently would be modulated by social pressures. Specifi-
cally, we predicted that case would be maintained in the language
longer if there was a social bias in its favor. In other words, we expected
that case marking would be maintained over more generations of
learners in the Bias for case condition compared to all other conditions
as this condition encouraged participants to feel positively oriented
towards the aliens speaking a dialect with consistent case marking.

3. Results
3.1. Word order in production

Before turning to our central hypothesis — the retention of redundant
case marking as a result of a positive social bias - we analyzed partici-
pants’ word order preferences in production. Although the case marker
was redundant in the initial language, it was possible for participants to
make it informative by introducing flexible word order into the languages
they produce. This might lead learners to maintain case marking in the
language regardless of whether there was a social bias in its favor.
However, this did not happen”: Although participants occasionally pro-
duced other word orders, they showed an overall strong preference for
SOV (96% SOV across all generations in the No bias condition; 96% SOV
across all generations in the Bias for no case condition; 91% SOV across all
generations in the Bias for case condition; 99% across all generations in
the Bias against case condition). This preference for matching the input
word order distribution replicates previous findings from a single gen-
eration of learners (Fedzechkina et al., 2016).

To test whether participants’ word order preferences differed sig-
nificantly across conditions (which might influence case retention), we
conducted a mixed effects logistic regression analysis to predict SOV
use from condition and generation as fixed effects. Generation was

2“Dummy” participants created for the purposes of case-use analysis in chains where
case had disappeared (see Section 2.3.2) were excluded from word order analysis as their
word order use was impossible to determine.
G. Roberts, M. Fedzechkina

treated as a continuous variable and was centered. Condition was
Helmert coded (a coding scheme in which each level of the variable is
compared with the mean of the preceding levels; Fox, 2002) as this
coding scheme best reflected the comparisons predicted by our hy-
pothesis (i.e., the prediction that learners of the Bias for case condition
would have different learning outcomes compared with all other con-
ditions). The first contrast compared Bias for no case and No bias con-
ditions; the second contrast compared Bias against case condition to the
joint mean of No bias condition and Bias for no case conditions; the third
contrast compared Bias for case to the joint mean of all other conditions.
The model included the maximal random effects structure justified by
the data based on backwards model comparison (random intercepts for
participant and object-noun). The results did not change when the
maximal converging random effects structure was used. Participants’
word order use did not differ depending on condition (No bias vs. Bias
for no case: ge = —0.24,z = —0.24,p = .811; Bias against case vs. the mean
of No bias and Bias for no case: ge = 0.28,z = 0.39,p = .694; Bias for case
vs. the mean of all other conditions: ge = —0.17,z = —0.51,p = .614).
There was no main effect of generation, suggesting that participants’
word order preferences remained stable over time
(8 = -0.22,z = -0.44,p = .661).

These data confirm that, as expected, participants did not respond to
the competition between fixed word order and case marking by in-
troducing more variable word order. The following section presents
participants’ case marking preferences over time, our main variable of
interest.

3.2. Case marking in production

Our central hypothesis was that learners would be more likely to
maintain case marking if it carried social meaning. To test this, we used
Cox mixed effects regression, a type of survival analysis, to predict case
omission over time (i.e., over generations of learners) from social bias
condition (Helmert coded as No bias vs. Bias for no case condition; Bias
against case vs. the joint mean of No bias and Bias for no case conditions;
Bias for case condition vs. the joint mean of all other conditions). The
model included the maximal random effects structure justified by the
data based on backwards model comparison (random intercepts for
participant and object-noun). The results did not change when the
maximal converging random effects structure was used.

As expected under our hypothesis, while case marking tended to be
lost over time in all conditions, this loss was significantly slower in the
Bias for case condition compared with all other conditions Bp = -0.42,
z= —11.02,p < .001, see Fig. 3), suggesting that a positive social bias
in favor of the case-dialect speakers caused case marking to be main-
tained in the language for longer. There was no significant difference in
case loss over time between the No bias and the Bias for no case con-
ditions G = —0.04,z = —0.42,p = .67) or between the Bias against case
and the joint mean of the No bias and the Bias for no case conditions (p=
0.002, z = 0.04, p = .97).

These findings support our hypothesis: Case marking in all dialects
was redundant and, consistent with previous results from one genera-
tion of learners (Fedzechkina et al., 2016), tended to be lost in all
conditions over time. However, this trend, stemming from biases for
efficient communication, was modulated by a positive social bias in
favor of case-dialect users. Consistent with the competitive exclusion
principle (Aronoff, 2016; Gause, 1934), case tended to persist in the
language over more generations of learners when it had a social niche
to occupy.

4. Discussion

We tested the hypothesis, derived from the competitive exclusion
principle (Aronoff, 2016; Gause, 1934; Hardin, 1960), that a linguistic
form in competition with a fitter form for the same communicative

199

Cognition 171 (2018) 194-201

niche would either eventually become extinct or could survive by oc-
cupying a new niche. More specifically, we hypothesized that, as a re-
sult of biases for efficient communication, a redundant case marker
would be lost through the process of repeated transmission, but that it
would be retained longer if there were a social bias in favor of its users.
This is what we found, and our results are consistent with the compe-
titive exclusion principle. Given the competition between two means of
conveying the same information (case marking and word order in our
study), one (case marking) was either forced to extinction (as in three of
our conditions) or came to occupy a new social niche (as in the Bias for
case condition, where such a niche was available). The trajectory of the
case marker use over time in the Bias for case condition looks strikingly
different from its trajectory in the other three conditions, which do not
differ significantly from each other. In the default situation, given no
particular social bias, the case marker disappeared rapidly and was
entirely lost by the fourth generation in all chains. It also declined at the
same rate if there was an explicit bias against the case dialect or an
explicit bias in favor of the no-case dialect. The only bias that influ-
enced case use compared with no bias at all was the social bias in favor
of the case dialect, and the effect of this was dramatic.

It is important to note that the frequency of case marker use de-
creased over time in all four conditions. This includes the Bias for case
condition, where it was used the majority of the time in the first gen-
eration of all chains (in striking contrast to the results for the other
chains). The mean rate of case use in this condition still eventually fell
below 25%, and it disappeared entirely in five of the ten chains. The
social bias, therefore, only modulated the decline of case marking over
time. One should be careful not to interpret this finding in terms of
learning and production biases having a stronger effect on language
change than social biases. Our question was whether a social bias could
help case survive against the odds, so we stacked the deck against case
as a matter of design: The no-case dialect taught to participants was
always the same (i.e., unlike the case dialect, it was not based on pre-
vious participants’ production), and thus sentences in that dialect never
contained case marking in any generation.

Similarly, our findings should not be taken to speak to the relative
strength of case marking and word order as cues for grammatical role
assignment. It is not surprising that participants introduced changes in
case as opposed to word order distributions. Previous work in minia-
ture-artificial-language learning has shown that adult participants tend
not to introduce changes to the input distributions of cues that contain
no variability (e.g., Fedzechkina et al., 2016; St Clair, Monaghan, &
Ramscar, 2009; Tily et al., 2011). The fact that word order was con-
sistent and case marking varied in the initial input could have biased
participants to introduce changes into the case system as opposed to
word order. Participants were also exposed to only simple transitive
sentences presented out of context. Given a different kind of task, in
which, for instance, participants were encouraged to emphasize dif-
ferent elements in the sentence, we might see greater flexibility emer-
ging in word order, as with focus- or topic-marking systems in many
natural languages (Givoén, 1988; Roberts & Stevens, 2017; Yokayama,
1986).

There are two potential limitations to our study. One is the relative
simplicity of the social bias in our experiment. Participants were simply
encouraged to feel positively or negatively oriented towards one of the
groups of aliens. This lacks the nuance of some sociolinguistic work.
Social meaning, for example, had been argued to exist in a complex
“indexical field” — a constellation of related social meanings in which
the same form can have multiple simultaneous meanings, whose re-
lative importance varies according to context (Eckert, 2008). However,
while it would certainly be valuable to explore more complex biases in
future work, we consider the simplicity of the bias in the current study
to be valuable in itself. In particular, our simple manipulation produced
very clear results that correspond intuitively to patterns seen in natural
language, providing a useful baseline for comparison with data re-
sulting from more complex biases. Our approach is also consistent with
G. Roberts, M. Fedzechkina

Condition
5 - Bias against case

Cognition 171 (2018) 194-201

Fig. 3. Case marker use by condition. Lines represent
mean case use at each generation; shapes represent in-
dividual participants. The error bars represent boot-
strapped 95% confidence intervals.

 

© —Bias for case
4 --Bias for no-case
No bias
100 onan oo 00 o
75
o
n
8 50
&
25
Be 5
0 Sosy tte ~

 

 

1 2
Generation

established paradigms in social psychology, and in particular with the
minimal group paradigm, in which participants take part in tasks with
partners who are stated to be either similar or different to them in some
task-irrelevant way (Tajfel, 1982). A typical (and robust) finding within
this paradigm is that human beings are surprisingly susceptible to
making simplistic in-group/out-group distinctions (Hogg, 2016). While
our study does not fit straightforwardly within this paradigm, our re-
sults are conceptually consistent with this observation.

A second potential limitation is that the experiment tested social
and communicative biases but involved only learning, with no real
communication or social interaction. Including direct communication
in a genuine social context into an experimental approach of this kind
(see, e.g., Fay, Garrod, Roberts, & Swoboda, 2010; Galantucci, 2005;
Kirby et al., 2015; Roberts, 2010; Sneller & Roberts, 2018) would in-
crease the ecological validity of the study. It would allow us to in-
vestigate the role of such processes as accommodation or interactive
alignment, whereby interacting individuals converge along various
behavioral dimensions, including language (Giles, Coupland, &
Coupland, 1991; Pickering & Garrod, 2004). Based on prior work in this
area (e.g., Pardo, 2006; Walker & Campbell-Kibler, 2015), we predict
that, while the general effect observed in our study would remain the
same, case marker use would be subject to interlocutor influences (cf.
Sneller & Roberts, 2018), such that the overall pattern of case loss or
retention would be more or less pronounced depending on patterns of
interaction. Like the inclusion of greater complexity of social biases,
including communication would thus be a valuable step in future stu-
dies.

As it is, however, our study provides — via a simple manipulation — a
compelling model of how Gause’s competitive exclusion principle might
operate in language, an explanation for the survival of certain re-
dundant linguistic forms, and a demonstration of how the role of
competing biases in the cultural evolution of language can be tested
experimentally.

Acknowledgements

We thank Andrew Watts and Elisha Cooper for their help with set-
ting up the study.

Appendix A. Supplementary material

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the
online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.11.005.
This includes a link to the dataset for this study, archived at the Open
Science Framework (Roberts & Fedzechkina, 2017).

200

References

Aronoff, M. (2016). Competition and the lexicon. In A. Elia, C. lacobino, & M. Voghera
(Eds.). Livelli di analisi e fenomeni di interfaccia. Atti del XLVI congresso internazionale
della societa di linguistica Italiana (pp. 39-52). Rome: Bulzoni Editore.

Bailey, R., Cameron, R., & Lucas, C. (Eds.). (2013). Oxford handbook of sociolinguistics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Blake, B. J. (2001). Case. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Croft, W. (2000). Explaining language change. Harlow: Pearson Education Ltd.

Culbertson, J., Smolensky, P., & Legendre, G. (2012). Learning biases predict a word
order universal. Cognition, 122, 306-329.

Dryer, M. S., & Haspelmath, M. (Eds.). (2013). The World Adas of Language Structures
OnlineLeipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

Eckert, P. (2008). Variation and the indexical field. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 12(4),
453-476.

Fay, N., Garrod, S., Roberts, L., & Swoboda, N. (2010). The interactive evolution of
human communication s ystems. Cognitive Science, 1-36.

Fedzechkina, M., Chu, B., & Jaeger, T. F. (2017). Human information processing shapes
language change. Psychological Science (in press).

Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. (2012). Language learners restructure their
input to facilitate efficient communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. (2016). Balancing effort and information
transmission during language acquisition: Evidence from word order and case-
marking. Cognitive Science.

Fedzechkina, M., Newport, E., & Jaeger, T. F. (2016). The miniature artificial language
learning paradigm as a complement to typological data. In L. Ortega, A. Tyler, H. I.
Park, & M. Uno (Eds.). The Usage-based Study of Language Learning and Multilingualism.
Georgetown: Georgetown University Press.

Fox, J. (2002). An R and S-plus companion to applied regression. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications Inc.

Galantucci, B. (2005). An experimental study of the emergence of human communication
systems. Cognitive Science, 29(5), 737-767.

Gause, G. F. (1934). The struggle for existence. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.

Giles, H., Coupland, J., & Coupland, N. (1991). Accommodation theory: Communication,
context and consequence. In H. Giles, J. Coupland, & N. Coupland (Eds.). Contexts of
accommodation: Developments in applied sociolinguistics (pp. 1-68). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Giv6n, T. (1988). The pragmatics of word order: Predictability, importance and attention.
In M. Hammond, E. A. Moravesik, & J. Wirth (Eds.). Studies in syntactic typology (pp.
243-284). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Hardin, G. (1960). The competitive exclusion principle. Science, 131, 1292-1297.

Hogg, M. A. (2016). Social identity theory. In S. McKeown, R. Haji, & N. Ferguson (Eds. ).
Understanding peace and conflict through social identity theory (pp. 3-17). Cham:
Springer International Publishing.

Holmes, J., & Meyerhoff, M. (Eds.). (2003). The handbook of language and gender. Malden,
MA: Blackwell.

Hupp, J. M., Sloutsky, V. M., & Culicover, P. W. (2009). Evidence for a domain-general
mechanism underlying the suffixation preference in language. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 24(6), 876-909.

Kabatek, J., & Pusch, C. D. (2011). The Romance languages: Typology. In van der Auwera,
& B. Kortmann (Eds.). The languages and linguistics of Europe: A comprehensive guide
(pp. 69-96). Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter.

Kirby, S. (1999). Function, selection and innateness: The emergence of language universals.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kirby, S., Griffiths, T., & Smith, K. (2014). Iterated learning and the evolution of lan-
guage. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 28, 108-114.

Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2015). Compression and communication
in the cultural evolution of linguistic structure. Cognition, 141, 87-102.
G. Roberts, M. Fedzechkina

Kurumada, C., & Jaeger, T. F. (2015). Communicative efficiency in language production:
Optional case-marking in Japanese. Journal of Memory and Language, 83, 152-178.

Labov, W. (1963). The social motivation of a sound change. Word, 19, 273-309.

Labov, W. (1972). Sociolinguistic patterns. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Labov, W. (2001). Principles of linguistic changeSocial factors Vol. 2. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Lanehart, S. (Ed.). (2015). The Oxford handbook of African American language. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Marchand, H. (1951). The syntactical change from inflectional to word order system and
some effects of this change on the relation “verb/object” in English. A diachronic-
synchronic interpretation. Anglia-Zeitschrift Fiir Englische Philologie, 70, 70-89.

Milroy, J., & Milroy, L. (2012). Authority in language: Investigating language prescription and
standardisation (3rd ed.). London: Routledge.

Pardo, J. S. (2006). On phonetic convergence during conversational interaction. Journal
of the Acoustic Society of America, 119(4), 2382-2393.

Pickering, M., & Garrod, S. (2004). Towards a mechanistic psychology of dialogue.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27, 169-226.

Pope, J., Meyerhoff, M., & Ladd, D. R. (2007). Forty years of language change on Martha’s
Vineyard. Language, 83(3), 615-627.

Rampton, B. (2010). Social class and sociolinguistics. Applied Linguistics Review, 1(1),
1-22.

Reali, F., & Griffiths, T. (2009). The evolution of frequency distributions: Relating reg-
ularization to inductive biases through iterated learning. Cognition, 111(3), 317-328.

Roberts, G. (2010). An experimental study of the role of social selection and frequency of
interaction in linguistic diversity. Interaction Studies, 11(10), 138-159.

Roberts, G. (2017). The linguist’s Drosophila: Experiments in language change. Linguistics
Vanguard, 3(1), 20160086.

Roberts, G., & Fedzechkina, M. (2017). Social biases modulate the loss of redundant forms
in the cultural evolution of language. Open Science Framework. http://dx.doi.org/10.

201

Cognition 171 (2018) 194-201

17605/OSF.IO/XHB5G.

Roberts, G., & Stevens, J. (2017). Information theoretic factors in marking linguistic
focus: A laboratory-language approach. Proceedings of the 39th annual conference of the
cognitive science society. Austin, TX.

Samara, A., Smith, K., Brown, H., & Wonnacott, E. (2017). Acquiring variation in an
artificial language: Children and adults are sensitive to socially conditioned linguistic
variation. Cognitive Psychology, 94, 85-114.

Sapir, E. (1921). Language: An introduction to the study of speech. New York: Harcourt,
Brace Retrieved from < http://www.bartleby.com/186/ > .

Smith, K., & Wonnacott, E. (2010). Eliminating unpredictable variation through iterated
learning. Cognition, 116(3), 444-449.

Sneller, B., & Roberts, G. (2018). Why some behaviors spread while others don’t: A la-
boratory simulation of dialect contact. Cognition, 170C, 298-311.

St Clair, M. C., Monaghan, P., & Ramscar, M. (2009). Relationships between language
structure and language learning: The suffixing preference and grammatical categor-
ization. Cognitive Science, 33(7), 1317-1329.

Tajfel, H. (1982). Social psychology of intergroup relations. Annual Review of Psychology,
33, 1-39.

Taylor, J. R. (2002). Cognitive grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Tily, H., Frank, M., & Jaeger, T. F. (2011). The learnability of constructed languages
reflects typological patterns. In L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.).
Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 1364-
1369). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

van Everbroeck, E. (2003). Language type frequency and learnability from a connectionist
perspective. Linguistic Typology, 7(1), 1-50.

Walker, A., & Campbell-Kibler, K. (2015). Repeat what after whom? Exploring variable
selectivity in a cross-dialectal shadowing task. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 546.

Yokayama, O. T. (1986). Discourse and word order. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
