 

Social Desirability Bias: A Demonstration and

Technique for Its Reduction

Randall A. Gordon

Western Carolina University

A demonstration of social desirability bias in survey research suit-
able for moderate to large class sizes is described. The method
used to reduce subjects’ response bias involved a manipulation of
instructions on a questionnaire. The standard instruction format
requested subjects to respond to three questions on dental hygiene
behavior and not to sign their names on the questionnaires. The
modified instructions included additional information regarding
the anonymity of the subjects’ responses, the need for accurate in-
formation, and the role of the subject as a contributor of valuable
information. The results from the demonstration are reported
and topics for classroom discussion are suggested.

The problems of overreporting socially desirable behav-
iors and underreporting socially undesirable behaviors
have received wide attention in surveys of research litera-
ture (Cahalan, 1968; Hyman, 1944; Parry & Crossley,
1950). Many techniques have been developed to reduce this
type of response bias on questionnaires, most of which in-
volve modifying the manner in which the questions are
asked (Sudman & Bradburn, 1982). Some techniques have
involved reducing the degree to which the question is
viewed as threatening by the respondent. For example, the
overstatement of socially desirable behavior has been re-
duced by beginning a question with “Did you happen to

. .” and by asking about behavior during a circumscribed
time period as opposed to beginning the question with “Do
you ever. . .?” (Bradburn & Sudman, 1979),

While pilot-testing a questionnaire to assess attitudes and
behaviors regarding oral hygiene among college students, it
became evident that the reported frequencies of behaviors
such as dental checkups and toothbrushing were higher
than the average for the general population (U.S. National
Center for Health Statistics, 1974, 1979). These differences
may have been partially due to increased awareness of the
importance of dental hygiene, but they were large enough
to suggest that some overreporting might have taken place.
To examine the possibility that subjects were overreporting
their frequency of dental hygiene behavior, a technique was
devised that focused on highlighting the role of the re-
spondent as a contributor of important information.

Before the questionnaire was administered, subjects were
verbally given additional information concerning the pur-
pose of the questions and the importance of honesty and ac-
curacy in their self-reports. The confidentiality and ano-
nymity of their responses were also emphasized, along with
the important contribution that their responses would pro-
vide. Subjects who received these modified instructions re-

40

ported substantially lower rates of dental checkups and
other dental health care behavior than previous subjects
who had only been informed of the anonymity of their
responses.

The effect of the instructional manipulation led to the de-
velopment of a simple classroom demonstration of social
desirability bias in survey research. The demonstration re-
veals the effect of instructional sets on questionnaire re-
sponses and leads to discussion of possible reasons for
underreporting and overreporting on questionnaires, in ad-
dition to other related issues in survey research (e.g., acqui-
escent response style and representativeness in sampling).
The following is a description of a systematic assessment of
the effect of such an appeal on reducing social desirability
bias.

Methad

Two forms of the questionnaire were developed; they
were identical, except for the instructions. Both forms had
the title “Dental Hygiene Behaviors” at the top, and the
standard format included the following instructions:

Over the last several years, psychologists have started to
work in conjunction with dentists in order to help improve
this area of health care. We would appreciate your an-
swering the following questions regarding dental hygiene
behaviors. Please do not write your name on this sheet.
Thank you for your participation.

The modified instructions read as follows:

Over the last several years, psychologists have started to
work in conjunction with dentists in order to help improve
this area of health care. One of the most important tasks in
this area of research (behavioral dentistry) is to collect accu-
rate information on the frequency of various dental hygiene
behaviors. Therefore, we would appreciate your answering
the following questions as honestly and accurately as possible.
Please do not write your name on this sheet. We are not in-
terested in individual responses, just the behaviors of people
in general. Thank you for your participation.

Both forms of the questionnaire requested the respond-
ent’s age and sex and answers to the following questions:

1. Do you have regular dental checkups? If so, how
often and why? If not, why not?

2. How often do you brush your teeth? Why?

3. Do you floss your teeth? If so, how often and why?
If not, why not?

Teaching of Psychology

 
Forty-eight students (24 men and 24 women) enrolled in
undergraduate courses in social psychology were randomly
assigned to receive either the standard or modified form of
the questionnaire. Students were given 15 min to complete
the questionnaires. The forms were then returned face-
down to the instructor. The purpose of the demonstration
and a summary of the results were presented to students
during the following class meeting.

Results

Given the directional nature of the experimental hypoth-
esis (that the modified instructions on the questionnaire
would reduce the frequency of reported behaviors), all sta-
tistical tests were one-tailed. An assessment of the three ma-
jor items revealed significant differences between the groups
in the predicted direction.

Responses to the item “Do you have regular checkups?”
were coded in the following manner: no = 0 and yes = 1.A
significantly greater percentage of subjects who received the
standard format responded affirmatively to this question
(96%) than subjects who received the modified instructions
(71%), (46) = 2.41, p < .01. Subjects who received the
standard instructions also reported brushing their teeth
more times a day (M = 2.63) than did the group that re-
ceived the modified instructions (M = 2.19), 0(46) = 1.92, p
< .03.

A difference approaching significance was found between
the groups on the item that asked subjects if they floss their
teeth. Responses were coded in the same manner used for
the checkup question. The results revealed a trend in the
predicted direction. Subjects who received the standard for-
mat answered affirmatively more often (79%) than subjects
who received the modified format (58%), t(46) = 1.56, p <
06.

The results suggest that having regular dental checkups
and brushing regularly may be considered to be more so-
cially desirable behaviors than flossing one’s teeth. Given
the much smaller segment of the population that flosses reg-
ularly, subjects may have felt less pressure to overstate the
frequency of this behavior. It should be noted that the ma-
jority of responses to the follow-up portion of the flossing
question (“If not, why not?”) produced responses that indi-
cated a lack of knowledge regarding the purpose of flossing,
the benefits, and the amount of time that it takes.

The degree to which random assignment produced ex-
perimental equivalence was partially assessed by examining
the avérage age and sex ratios of respondents in the two
groups. Random assignment produced groups with iden-
tical sex ratios (12 men and 12 women in each group) and
relatively similar average ages: M (standard format) = 21.33
years and M (modified format) = 21.58 years.

Although the modified instructions significantly reduced
the tendency to overreport socially desirable behavior, it is
possible that these instructions did not alleviate the prob-
lem entirely. A comparison of the mean number of tooth-
brushings per day by the modified instruction group in this
study (M = 2.19) and the mean response to this question
from a national health survey (M = 1.60) revealed a rela-
tively large difference (U.S. National Center for Health Sta-
tistics, 1974). As previously suggested, this finding may rep-

Vol. 14, No. 1, February 1987

resent a real difference between the frequency of tooth-
brushing in the general population and among college
students.

Discussion

To prepare material for lecture and discussion, addi-
tional information on the prevalence of social desirability
bias and procedures that have been used to reduce it can be
found in Sudman and Bradburn (1982). This book devoted
a chapter to the problem of social desirability and described
techniques for its reduction. A more recent review is pro-
vided by Nederhof (1985). This review was written from a
self-presentational perspective that regards social desirabil-
ity as the result of self- and other-deception. The article ex-
amined the relevant research literature and described seven
methods that have been used to prevent or reduce social de-
sirability bias.

The problem of social desirability remains as a source of
error in much survey research, and this type of demonstra-
tion alerts students to this potential problem. To lead into a
discussion of the results, students should first be told that
there were two forms of the questionnaire that varied only
in the content of the instructions. Some students may al-
ready be aware of this through discussion with classmates.
Hypotheses regarding the purpose of the modified instruc-
tions should now be discussed. Students who participated
in the demonstration were surprised to find out that the
modified instructions could create the observed differences
between groups.

After revealing the extent to which experimental equiva-
lence has been attained, a discussion of possible reasons for
the observed effect of the modified instructions can be con-
ducted. This discussion might focus on whether students
believe that social desirability bias on questionnaires is due
to a desire to appear “good” to others or to oneself.

As Cahalan (1968) suggested, in a reevaluation of a major
survey that examined social desirability, subjects may
overreport socially desirable behaviors in order to protect
their self-image. If a desire to appear good in one’s own eyes
is the cause of overreporting, then appearing socially desira-
ble to others may be of little concern; a focus on anonymity
may have a minimal effect on reducing such bias. It is possi-
ble that the manipulation used in the demonstration re-
duced the overreporting of behavior by focusing students
on the contribution they were making to others (e.g,, the
scientific community), thereby reducing the need to appear
“good” to themselves. It is clear that a variety of approaches
must be used collectively in order to reduce this response
bias to tolerable levels.

The use of dental hygiene behavior as the topic of the
questionnaire was due to a personal interest in this form of
behavior. The demonstration could easily be modified to
focus on other forms of socially desirable behavior such as
weating seat belts or the amount of time spent studying.
This type of demonstration could also be used in a variety of
courses. [t would be appropriate for classes in tests and
measurement, research methodology, and other courses
that focus on attitude measurement and survey research.

To summarize, the results support the hypothesis that
more accurate responses can be obtained by stressing the

41
following: the importance of the information being pro-
vided by subjects, the importance of honest and accurate
self-reports, and the anonymity of subjects’ responses. As a
classroom demonstration, the exercise can be used to illu-
strate a potential source of bias in survey research. It may
also be used to demonstrate the technique of random as-
signment and the relative degree of experimental equiva-
lence that it provides.

References

Bradburn, N. M., & Sudman, S. (1979). Improving interview
method and questionnaire design: Response effects to threatening
questions in survey research. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Cahalan, D. (1968). Correlates of response accuracy in the Denver
validity study. Public Opinion Quarterly, 32, 607-621.

Hyman, H. H. (1944). Do they tell the truth? Public Opinion Quar-
terly, 8, 557-559.

Nederhof, A. J. (1985). Methods of coping with social desirability
bias: A review. European Journal of Social Psychology, 15,
263-280,

Parry, H.J., & Crossley, H. M. (1950). Validity of responses to sur-
vey questions. Public Opinion Quarterly, 14, 61-80

Sudman, S., & Bradburn, N. M. (1982). Asking questions. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

U.S. National Center for Health Statistics. (1974). Diet and dental
health, a study of relationships: United States, 1971-1974 (Data
from the National Health Survey, Series 11, No. 225), Wash-
ington, DC: Government Printing Office.

U.S. National Center for Health Statistics. (1979). Dental visits
volume and interval since last visit: United States, 1978-1979
(Data from the National Health Survey, Series 10, No. 138).
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

Notes

1. [thank two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments
and suggestions on an earlier version of this article.

2. Requests for reprints should be sent to Randall A. Gordon, De-
partment of Psychology, Western Carolina University,
Cullowhee, NC 28723.

 

Using Structured Group Workshops to Teach Group

Process

Marilyn Eichler

Eastern Connecticut State University

A course in group process for master’s level students in a Clin-
ical/Community Psychology Program is described. When group
methods courses are taught using the lecture/seminar method,
they often fail to engage students on an emotional level. Alter-
natively, a totally experiential format (e.g., students as group
therapy participants and the instructor as leader/therapist), fails
to provide an adequate information base. This course offers stu-
dents the opportunity to experience group process directly through
developing, leading, and participating in structured group work-
shops in class.

Forty years ago, group therapeutic methods were rarely
used; now they are provided for clients in most community
mental health agencies, clinics, and counseling centers
(Shapiro, 1978). Because master’s level students employed
in various agencies are often expected to lead or co-lead
groups, they should have an understanding of the various
theories and methods of group therapy as well as some di-
tect group experience (Berman, 1975; Yalom, 1975). Gener-
ally, a one-semester course in group process is a master’s-
level requirement.

To provide information about group counseling theories
and procedures, the traditional lecture/seminar method is
often used. However, the didactic method alone is viewed

42

as failing to engage students on an emotional level (Fidler,
1973; Yalom, 1975). Providing a completely experiential ap-
proach with the students participating as group members
and the instructor as leader/therapist is an alternative also
used (Halgin, 1982; Yalom, 1975). Yet, many theorists ar-
gue that direct participation must be combined with cogni-
tive evaluation to assure the most effective integration of
group leadership skills (Corey, 1981; Yalom, 1975).
Recognizing the need to respond to both the cognitive and
emotional aspects of the learning process, I developed a
course using structured groups for experience-based skill ac-
quisition combined with a broad survey of therapy meth-
ods, Unfortunately, in our setting there is no possibility for
observing a live group in action and no opportunity to prac-
tice directly with clients. I was faced with the problem of
how to implement these goals with limited resources and
within the restricted time of a 16-week semester.

Our graduate classes typically meet once a week for 3-hr
with an enrollment of 12 to 14 students. These students are
enrolled in an MS in Clinical/Community Psychology Pro-
gram. We offer a 36 credit terminal degree serving primarily
part-time students employed during the day in various local
human service agencies. Some students plan to continue
their education; most will remain employed at the master’s

Teaching of Psychology

 
