 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

 

Social Desirability Bias and the Validity of Indirect Questioning
Author(s): Robert J. Fisher

Source: Journal of Consumer Research, Sep., 1993, Vol. 20, No. 2 (Sep., 1993), pp. 303-
315

Published by: Oxford University Press

 

 

 

Stable URL: fhttps://www.jstor.org/stable/2489277

 

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Oxford University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Journal of Consumer Research

 

JSTOR

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Social Desirability Bias and the Validity of
Indirect Questioning

ROBERT J. FISHER*

Indirect (i.e., structured projective) questioning has been employed frequently in
marketing and other social sciences to reduce social desirability bias, that is, sys-
tematic error in self-report measures resulting from the desire of respondents to
avoid embarrassment and project a favorable image to others. Yet little is known
about the validity of indirect questioning in reducing social desirability bias. This
article reports on three studies that examine indirect questioning as a technique to
reduce social desirability bias on self-report measures. The effects of asking indirect
(i.e., structured, projective) questions were compared with direct (i.e., structured,
personal) questions. The pattern of results indicates that indirect questioning reduces
social desirability bias on variables subject to social influence and has no significant
effect on socially neutral variables. The social nature of the differences between
direct and indirect questioning groups, and the attribution of an undesirable trait to
an out-group but not an in-group target, supports the view that subjects projected
their beliefs and evaluations in the indirect response situation. These results are

consistent across several product categories and indirect question wordings.

 

uch of what we think we know about human

behavior comes from self-report measures (Pe-
terson and Kerin 1981). Unfortunately, the basic hu-
man tendency to present oneself in the best possible
light can significantly distort the information gained
from self-reports. Respondents are often unwilling or
unable to report accurately on sensitive topics for ego-
defensive or impression management reasons. The re-
sult is data that are systematically biased toward re-
spondents’ perceptions of what is “‘correct” or socially
acceptable (Maccoby and Maccoby 1954). This phe-
nomenon is called social desirability bias and has been
found to occur in virtually all types of self-report mea-
sures and across nearly all social sciences literatures
(e.g., Levy 1981; Peltier and Walsh 1990; Robinette
1991; Simon and Simon 1975; Zerbe and Paulhus
1987),

Not only is social desirability bias pervasive, but it
can lead to the reporting of spurious or misleading re-
search results. Prior studies have found that social de-
sirability bias can attenuate, inflate, or moderate vari-
able relationships (Zerbe and Paulhus 1987); increase
measurement error (cf. Cote and Buckley 1988); and

 

“Robert J. Fisher is assistant professor of marketing, School of
Business Administration, University of Southern California, Los An-
geles, CA, 90089-1421. The author would like to thank Valerie S.
Folkes, Jill A. Grace, J. Jeffrey Inman, Kent Nakamoto, Linda L.
Price, Dennis W. Rook, and David W. Stewart for comments on
earlier versions of this article. The author also benefited from dis-
cussions with Stephen J. Hoch and comments by the editor and three
reviewers.

 

303

affect variable means (Peterson and Kerin 1981). Re-
search that does not recognize and compensate for social
desirability bias may lead to unwarranted theoretical
or practical conclusions about consumers’ psychological
traits (e.g., Campbell 1950; Peltier and Walsh 1990);
purchase motivations (e.g., Levy 1981); and attitudes,
intentions, and behaviors (e.g., Mensch and Kandel
1988).

An important technique used by researchers to mit-
igate the effects of social desirability bias is indirect (i.e.,
structured, projective) questioning.' Indirect question-
ing is a projective technique that asks subjects or re-
spondents to answer structured questions from the per-
spective of another person or group (Anderson 1978;
Calder and Burnkrant 1977; Robertson and Joselyn
1974). For example, marketing researchers have asked
subjects to predict the types of people most likely to eat
hot cereal (Westfall, Boyd, and Campbell 1957); to in-
dicate the extent to which ‘“‘a consumer”? would react
to reference group influence (Bearden and Etzel 1982;
Brinberg and Plimpton 1986; Park and Lessig 1977);
to identify the emotional responses of the anonymous
author of a story describing a past consumption expe-
rience (Havlena and Holbrook 1986); and to state the

 

'In marketing research the emphasis has been on unstructured pro-
jective methods such as thematic apperception tests, sentence com-
pletion, and word association (e.g., Levy 1981; Rook 1985; for a
review see Kassarjian [1974]). Unlike the structured approach iden-
tified here, unstructured methods allow subjects much greater freedom
in organizing and responding to the projective stimulus. Conse-
quently, unstructured projective questioning is particularly valuable
in helping subjects express latent motivations.

© 1993 by JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH, Inc. @ Vol. 20 @ September 1993
All rights reserved. 0093-5301 /94/2002-0010$2.00

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
304

importance of various attributes in determining the
choices of “most people” (Alpert 1971).

Indirect questioning is thought to reduce the distor-
tion of ‘“‘private” opinions that are revealed to the re-
searcher by asking respondents to “report on the nature
of the external world” rather than about themselves
(Westfall et al. 1957, p. 138). It is expected that re-
spondents project their unconscious biases into ambig-
uous response situations and reveal their own attitudes
(Campbell 1950; Holmes 1968; Sherwood 1981). For
example, if a respondent predicts that “‘other people”
drink and drive under certain circumstances the answer
would be interpreted to mean that the respondent is
likely to behave in this manner. Indirect questioning
allows respondents to “describe their own feelings be-
hind a facade of impersonality” (Simon and Simon
1975, p. 586).

Despite good theoretical reasons to believe that in-
direct questioning compensates for social desirability
bias, empirical research on the subject is limited and
inconclusive. Only one prior study in marketing has
empirically examined the validity of indirect question-
ing as a technique to reduce social desirability bias. Un-
fortunately, this study used unstructured indirect
measures and structured direct measures, making in-
terpretation of the results problematic (see Steele 1964).
Other researchers have focused on topics such as the
predictive validity of direct versus indirect methods
(Alpert 1971) or methodological studies related to the
design of projective stimuli (Anderson 1978; Robertson
and Joselyn 1974).

Beyond the lack of empirical verification to support
the use of indirect questioning as a means of reducing
social desirability bias, the extent to which indirect
questioning provides information about the respondent
is unclear. Rather than provide insights into the self,
indirect questions may actually reveal what respondents
predict a “typical other” might do or think (Maccoby
and Maccoby 1954). For example, an adolescent might
predict that his or her peers will shoplift under certain
circumstances on the basis of knowledge of peer shop-
lifting and not because s/he is likely to shoplift him- or
herself. The adolescent’s response is an objective judg-
ment that is independent of his or her own intentions
and behaviors.

The objectives of the three studies reported here are
to evaluate indirect questioning as a means of reducing
social desirability bias, to explore the potential for this
method to add other forms of systematic error to self-
report measures, and to gain insights into the extent to
which indirect questioning reveals information about
the self. The following sections develop the research
hypotheses, specify the research designs, present the
findings, and discuss the results and implications of
these experiments.

STUDY 1

The effects of questioning method on social desir-
ability bias depend on the constructs under investigation

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

and the social expectations perceived by the respondent
(Paulhus 1984). On this basis, hypotheses must be de-
veloped within a conceptual context that specifies the
likely nature and direction of these effects. The present
study employs the Miniard and Cohen (1983) model of
behavioral intentions for this purpose because it par-
titions the determinants of behavioral intentions into
variables that are likely to be differentially affected by
social desirability bias.

The Miniard and Cohen model specifies that behav-
ioral intentions are a function of individuals’ expecta-
tions about the personal and normative consequences
of undertaking a behavior (see Miniard and Cohen
[1983] for more details on this model). The personal
component of the model is composed of an individual’s
beliefs about the likelihood that a behavior leads to sa-
lient personal outcomes and an evaluation of these out-
comes. Salient personal outcomes may be positive or
negative and are valued as ends in themselves, that is,
they have intrinsic worth to the individual. These con-
sequences are perceived without reference to the visi-
bility of the considered behavior, the subsequent ap-
proval or disapproval of referent others, or the extent
to which the behavior serves to affiliate one with a social
group.

Social desirability bias is unlikely to distort self-report
measures of personal outcomes because this type of
outcome is based on internalized values that are inde-
pendent of social considerations. For example, the pur-
chase of a new compact-disc player might be motivated
by personal outcomes related to the durability of the
compact disc’s recording medium. This product char-
acteristic provides both financial and psychological
benefits or outcomes because valued recordings dete-
riorate less quickly than is the case with other media.
The likelihood and importance of these outcomes do
not depend on what others might think or do. Accord-
ingly, self-reported personal outcomes should not be
affected by social desirability bias because respondents
are unlikely to feel threatened or embarrassed about
accurately reporting their views. If personal outcomes
are independent of social desirability bias, significant
differences should not exist between direct and indirect
measures of this variable.

A test of the independence of personal outcomes to
social expectations is achieved by an examination of
the variable’s behavior under anonymous and unanon-
ymous response conditions. Removing anonymity in-
creases the pressure on subjects to respond in a socially
acceptable manner (cf. Kelman 1961). Given that per-
sonal outcomes are socially neutral, the anonymity of
the research setting should not affect responses under
either direct or indirect questioning. In both cases, sub-
jects are reporting beliefs and evaluations that are in-
dependent of social influence.

The normative component of the model is composed
of individuals’ beliefs about the likelihood a behavior
leads to salient social outcomes and an evaluation of

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

these outcomes. This component reflects the extent to
which individuals are motivated by the expectations of
another person or group. The individual, by fulfilling
(or acting contrary to) the expectations of others, an-
ticipates socially mediated rewards (or punishments).
The individual does what a referent wants him or her
to do because it is instrumental in achieving a social
purpose.

Social desirability bias is likely to affect self-reported
normative outcomes because the pursuit of social ap-
proval as a purchase motivation is inconsistent with
social norms and expectations. For example, “shopping
list’’ research by Haire (1950) and replications or ex-
tensions by others (e.g., Robertson and Joselyn 1974)
suggest that consumers are unable or unwilling to ex-
press the extent to which they are motivated by social
factors. When asked directly, consumption motivations
tend to focus on the functional aspects of a product
such as taste or gas mileage (Haire 1950). Consumption
motivations such as social positioning and the approval
of others are revealed only with indirect questioning.

Research on American values also indicates that the
overt pursuit of social approval through consumption
is undesirable. Americans consistently assign a low rank
to social recognition (the respect and admiration of
others) and a high rank to independence as cultural
values (Rokeach 1979, p. 133; Rokeach and Ball-Ro-
keach 1989, p. 778). Of 18 terminal values, social rec-
ognition was ranked 17th in 1971 and 18th in 1974 and
1981, while independence was ranked third in all three
studies. Given that self-reported values represent cul-
turally desirable ideals (Rokeach 1979), these rankings
imply that expressing one’s desire for social approval
is inappropriate in American culture.

Accordingly, socially desirable responding behavior
should cause normative outcomes to be understated
with direct questioning because subjects are inclined to
present themselves in a way that is consistent with social
expectations. Under indirect questioning, however,
subjects are able to disengage themselves from the social
implications of their responses, leading to larger esti-
mates of normative beliefs and evaluations. Subjects
should most actively engage in impression management
when they believe their responses will be used as evi-
dence about themselves and not as objective statements
about the “real world.”

The anonymity of the research setting should interact
with questioning method to have a differential effect on
self-reported normative outcomes. Removal of ano-
nymity should cause subjects answering direct questions
to feel greater pressure to make their responses consis-
tent with social expectations. These responses are most
likely to have symbolic or communicational properties
because they represent the personal thoughts and feel-
ings of the subject on a socially sensitive topic and the
responses are visible to others. However, eliminating
anonymity is not expected to have the same effect on
subjects answering indirect questions because they are

305

distanced from their responses by the projective
method. A summary of study hypotheses related to the
effects of questioning method and anonymity on mean
scores follows:

Hla: Method of questioning has no effect on mean
personal outcomes because of the social
neutrality of this variable.

Hib: Indirect questioning reduces social desir-
ability bias, resulting in higher mean nor-
mative outcomes.

H2a: Anonymity has no effect on mean personal
outcomes because of the social neutrality of
this variable.

H2b: Removing anonymity increases social desir-
ability bias, resulting in lower mean nor-
mative outcomes under direct questioning.

Method

A 2 (questioning method) X 2 (anonymity) between-
subjects experiment was performed to test the hy-
potheses. A convenience sample of 184 male and female
undergraduate students was selected and randomly as-
signed to the conditions (46 per cell). A student sample
was selected because of the widespread study of this
population in consumer research on normative influ-
ence and other socially sensitive topics. Subjects were
contacted within a normal classroom situation and told
that the purpose of the study was to generate infor-
mation to be used in the advertising campaign for a
new product targeted at college students. A fictional
new product was selected to avoid the influence of prior
beliefs on subjects’ responses. A pretest indicated the
new product, an innovative stereo headphone designed
for use with Walkman-type cassette or compact-disc
players, was believable and of interest to those in the
target market.2 Moreover, the pretest indicated that
students perceived that adoption of the new product
had significant social implications because of its visi-
bility and innovative features. To enhance involvement,
subjects were shown a mock-up of the new product, a
professionally designed brochure layout, and entered
in a drawing for three $50 prizes for participating in
the study.

The experimental manipulations took the form of
instructions to subjects and question wording.* In the
direct questioning condition, subjects were asked to re-
spond to a series of items in terms of their own beliefs
and evaluations. In the indirect questioning condition,
subjects were asked to predict the likely responses of
“a typical college student.” Item wording differed be-

 

?The new headphone design was described as similar in size and
weight to those currently used with portable stereo systems, except
that the new design does not require wires connecting the headphone
set to the player unit.

3All manipulations and measures are available from the author.

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
306

tween conditions only to the extent that third-person
wording was substituted for first-person wording in the
indirect condition. For example, the words “‘the typical
college student will . . .” were substituted for “I
will . . .” in the indirect condition. The items mea-
suring the constructs of interest were randomly mixed
with other items unrelated to this study.

Anonymity was manipulated with information about
the likelihood subjects would be asked to discuss their
responses with a researcher after completing the instru-
ment. Subjects in the unanonymous condition were
told, ‘““You may be asked to discuss your responses with
a researcher when you have finished.” In addition, sub-
jects in this condition were asked to include their stu-
dent identification number on the first page of the in-
strument. Subjects in the anonymous condition were
told, “Your responses are completely anonymous,” and
they were not asked to include their student identifi-
cation number.

Measurement

After a review of the relevant literatures, 10 items
were generated to measure the personal and normative
outcome constructs. The items, worded in the first per-
son (i.e., directly), were administered as part of a larger
data collection effort to 90 graduate and undergraduate
students at another university. Two items were deleted
by corrected item-to-total correlations and principal
axis factor analysis with varimax rotation. The analyses
resulted in eight items measuring the two constructs of
interest.

Measures of the constructs were designed specifically
for the student sample and new headphone product.
For personal outcomes, a pretest on an unrelated sample
indicated that one of the new product’s key advantages
was the increased freedom of movement it afforded.
This attribute was identified by pretest respondents as
being intrinsically valued, that is, desirable regardless
of the social aspects of consumption. Consequently, be-
liefs and evaluations of personal outcomes were mea-
sured with items such as “‘the new headphones provide
more freedom of movement than other headphones.”
For normative outcomes, subjects were asked to indi-
cate their beliefs and evaluations of statements such as
“students I know would have a favorable reaction if I
bought one of the new products.” The belief compo-
nents of the outcome variables were measured with
seven-point “highly likely” to ‘“‘not at all likely” scales.
The evaluation components were measured with seven-
point “very important” to “‘very unimportant” scales.
For hypothesis testing, the multi-item scales were sum-
mated to form a single indicator of each construct.

Results

Measurement. Confirmatory factor analyses were
conducted for the individual two-factor models within

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

TABLE 1
SCALE CHARACTERISTICS: STUDY 1

 

 

 

No. Actual

of scale Scale
Group measure items range mean sD Alpha
Direct (7 = 92):

Personal outcomes 4 47-144 109.4 23.2 19
Beliefs only 4 12-24 20.4 29 68
Evaluations only 4 15-24 21.3 2.6 13

Normative outcomes 4 0-105 36.4 29.6 4
Beliefs only 4 0-22 12.7 5.8 91
Evaluations only 4 0-24 9.2 6.4 92

Indirect (n = 92):

Personal outcomes 4 42-144 111.8 27.1 81
Beliefs only 4 9-24 20.6 3.3 WS
Evaluations only 4 41-24 21.4 2.9 79

Normative outcomes 4 0-132 65.8 31.6 89
Beliefs only 4 §-22 15.9 4.0 82
Evaluations only 4 0-24 15.3 5.2 -88

 

Note.—Personal outcomes and normative outcomes were measured as the
sum of the product of beliefs (i.e., ‘‘not at all likely” to “highly likely’) and
evaluations (i.e., “very unimportant” to “‘very important’). All scales were scored
from zero to six. Higher numbers indicate higher levels of each variable.

the direct and indirect questioning groups. Both models
have acceptable internal and external consistency given
an overall x? of 34.25 (df = 19, p = .017) with a good-
ness-of-fit index (GFI) = .92 for the direct group and a
x? of 33.45 (df = 19, p = .021) with a GFI = .92 for the
indirect group. The normed-fit index (Bentler and Bo-
nett 1980) indicates that 91 percent of the observed-
measure covariation is explained in each of the mea-
surement models.

The internal consistency of the measures is supported
by three additional tests. First, the scales exhibited good
internal consistency with coefficient alphas for personal
outcomes of .79 (direct) and .81 (indirect) and for nor-
mative outcomes of .91 (direct) and .89 (indirect). Sec-
ond, variance-extracted estimates reflect the amount of
variance captured by a measure relative to random
measurement error (Fornell and Larcker 1981). All
measures had variance-extracted estimates that ap-
proached or exceeded the .50 level with values of .48
(direct) and .53 (indirect) for personal outcomes and
.71 (direct) and .66 (indirect) for normative outcomes.
Finally, all indicator /-values in the confirmatory factor
analysis exceeded 5.0 (p < .001) in both groups. See
Table | for a summary of scale characteristics.

Manipulation Checks. Data from the experiment |
were analyzed with an ANOVA. First, the anonymity
manipulation was evaluated via a summated four-item
manipulation check on perceived anonymity. Items in-
cluded ‘‘My responses on this survey can be traced back
to me” (reverse scored). The manipulation was suc-
cessful given a significant main effect of the manipu-
lation on perceptions of anonymity (F(1,180) = 90.42,
p <.001) with the anonymous mean (X = 17.17) higher

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

than the unanonymous mean (X¥ = 10.96). No unin-
tended main or interaction effects were found. Second,
the anonymity manipulation may have caused subjects
to feel more accountable for their responses than stu-
dents in the unanonymous condition, thus causing
subjects in this group to respond more carefully (cf.
Tetlock and Kim 1987). To evaluate this possible con-
found, a summated four-item manipulation check was
used to measure subjects’ perceptions about the care
with which they responded. Items included “I was care-
ful when I answered the questions on this survey.” No
significant effects (p > .10) were found for anonymity,
questioning method, or anonymity X questioning
method on response care.

Tests of Hypotheses. Hypothesis 1a was supported
with no main effect of questioning method on personal
outcomes (F(1,180) = .43, NS), with similar means in
both the direct (¥ = 109.4) and indirect (¥ = 111.8)
conditions. Hypothesis 1b was supported with a main
effect of questioning method on normative outcomes
(FUL, 180) = 43.15, p < .01), with the indirect question-
ing mean (XY = 65.8) higher than the direct questioning
mean (X = 36.4). These two results indicate that subjects
made the same evaluations for a socially neutral variable
across questioning conditions but reported significantly
lower evaluations for a socially sensitive (undesirable)
purchase motivation when asked directly.

The lack of a main effect for anonymity on personal
outcomes with indirect questioning predicted in Hy-
pothesis 2a was supported (F(1,180) = .02, NS), with
similar mean scores across the anonymous (X = 110.3)
and unanonymous (X = 110.8) conditions. This result
suggests that personal outcomes are independent of so-
cial influence because subjects made the same evalua-
tions for themselves as for others, regardless of the an-
onymity of their responses. Hypothesis 2b stated that
a reduction in anonymity will lower mean normative
outcomes only in the direct questioning condition. A
simple-effects test revealed a significant reduction
(Fd, 180) = 3.97, p < .05) in mean normative outcome
scores in the direct questioning condition (Xanonymous

= 42.7 and Xunanonymous = 30.1), but not in the in-
direct questioning condition (Xanonymous = = 61.1 and
Xunanonymous = 70.5). These differences were also re-
flected in a significant anonymity X questioning method
interaction (F(1,180) = 6.04, p < .05). There was no main
effect of anonymity on normative outcomes (F(1,180)

.13, NS), with similar means across the anonymous
(v= = 51.9) and unanonymous (¥ = 50.3) conditions.
These results indicate the social sensitivity of normative
outcomes given the lower mean scores that occurred in
the unanonymous, direct cell. The results are summa-
rized in Table 2 and Figure 1. Table 2 also includes the
effects of the manipulations on the individual belief and
evaluation components of the outcome variables. In
terms of the individual components, Table 2 reveals
significant effects for questioning method on normative

307

beliefs and evaluations and the anonymity < question-
ing method interaction only for evaluations. The larger
effect for the evaluations component suggests it is more
acceptable to predict that others are /ikely to approve
of a consumption behavior than it is to indicate that
this outcome is important.

Discussion

The results of this experiment suggest that indirect
questioning operates to mitigate social desirability bias
arid does not systematically affect the means of variables
that are independent of social influence. Overall, the
pattern of effects implies that subjects projected their
beliefs and evaluations when responding to indirect
questions. The specific findings of study | are discussed
below.

The lack of questioning method and anonymity ef-
fects on self-reported personal outcomes is evidence that
personal outcomes are independent of social influence
and that indirect questioning does not systematically
bias mean scores of variables of this type. First, the lack
of an anonymity effect indicates that subjects’ self-re-
ports of personal outcomes were not influenced by the
threat of social pressure. This finding is consistent with
the asocial nature of personal outcomes and demon-
strates that subjects were not concerned about the sym-
bolic or communicational aspects of their responses (cf.
Miniard and Cohen 1983). Second, subjects made very
similar predictions in the direct and indirect questioning
groups for personal outcomes. The lack of a main effect
for questioning method on personal outcomes suggests
that subjects projected their own beliefs and evaluations
into the ambiguous response situation. That is, no sys-
tematic upward or downward bias resulted from asking
subjects to make predictions about typical others as op-
posed to making evaluations in the first person.

Indirect questioning, by contrast, produces a very dif-
ferent pattern of responses for self- and typical-other
questions. Mean estimates of normative outcomes var-
ied across questioning-method conditions, and remov-
ing response anonymity lowered mean normative out-
comes with direct questioning. The main effect of
questioning method on normative outcomes combined
with the absence of a main effect for personal outcomes
implies that social desirability bias is operating on self-
reported normative outcomes. The social nature of the
effect is evidence that the results are not due to global
variations in how subjects evaluated these outcomes
for themselves and others. If subjects simply make dif-
ferent self- versus other predictions, mean differences
should result for both personal and normative outcomes
across questioning methods. The significantly lower
normative outcome mean in the unanonymous, direct
questioning cell supports this interpretation because
removing anonymity only affected the mean of the so-
cially sensitive variable. Subjects evidently felt the need

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
308

TABLE 2

ANOVA RESULTS: STUDY 1

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

 

 

 

Means
Sum of Anonymous Unanonymous
Measure and source df squares F wo and direct and indirect
Personal outcome:
Beliefs X evaluations
Anon 1 13.6 .02 110.3 110.8
Ques 1 272.7 43 109.4 111.8
Anon X ques 1 869.6 1.37
Beliefs only:
Anon 1 2 .02 20.5 20.4
Ques 1 2.2 .23 20.4 20.6
Anon X ques 1 26.6 2.81
Evaluations only:
Anon 1 1.4 18 21.3 21.4
Ques 1 2 .03 21.3 21.4
Anon X ques 1 2 .03
Normative outcomes:
Beliefs X evaluations
Anon 1 115.8 13 51.9 50.3
Ques 1 39,619.6 43.15** 18 36.4 65.8
Anon X ques 1 5,544.0 6.04* 02
Beliefs only:
Anon 1 1.6 .06 14.2 14.4
Ques 1 453.9 18.30%" 09 12.7 15.9
Anon X ques 1 35.7 1.44
Evaluations only:
Anon 1 52.2 1.62 12.8 11.7
Ques 1 1,704.4 §2.77** 21 9.2 15.3
Anon X ques 1 244.3 7.56** 03

 

NoTeE.—n = 184 for study 1. The independent variables are the dichotomous manipulations while the dependent variables are the continuous manipulation checks.
Anon, manipulated anonymity; ques, manipulated questioning method. Although the hypotheses relate to the overall personal outcome and normative outcome
variables, the effects of the manipulations on the individual belief and evaluation components are included to provide additional detail.

*o < .05.
“p< .01.

to manage their responses when answering directly
worded questions on a socially sensitive variable in an
unanonymous situation.

STUDY 2

A second experiment was designed to investigate the
effects of indirect questioning on the relationships be-
tween personal and normative outcomes and intentions.
This study was undertaken for two reasons. First, many
consumer researchers on socially sensitive topics are
interested in structural or associational evidence rather
than mean scores (e.g., Alpert 1971; Fishbein and Ajzen
1975). This investigation could not be carried out in
study 1 because a Box’s M-test revealed significant dif-
ferences in the covariance matrices across anonymity
conditions within the indirect group (x? = 13.67, df
= 3, p < .01). As a consequence, it would be inappro-
priate to pool the anonymous and unanonymous co-
variance matrices within each questioning group. Sec-
ond, it is desirable to establish the reliability of the key
findings of study | through a partial replication.

Consistent with study 1, social desirability bias should
differentially affect variables that are neutral and sen-
sitive to social influence. Again using the Miniard and
Cohen (1983) model of behavioral intentions, the re-
lationship between personal outcomes and intentions
is expected to be unaffected by questioning method.
Subjects should not be motivated to ‘““manage” the re-
lationship between personal outcomes and intentions
because their responses are independent of social ex-
pectations. In the present context, there appear to be
no relevant norms governing beliefs and evaluations of
the freedom of movement offered by the new head-
phones. No differences should exist in the relationship
between personal outcomes and intentions across ques-
tioning methods.

The estimated effect of normative outcomes on in-
tentions, however, should be attenuated by social de-
sirability bias when direct questioning is used. Subjects
may consciously or unconsciously engage in image
management by distorting the association between their
normative outcome and intention scores. For example,

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

309

FIGURE 1
PERSONAL AND NORMATIVE OUTCOME BY QUESTIONING METHOD. AND ANONYMITY

 

100 +-

BOT" indirect

Normative

st ———o
Outcomes g9+

50--

40 ee
30>

 

 

Direct
20---
10--
Yes No

Anonymity

subjects may lower normative outcome scores when in-
tentions are high to avoid giving the impression they
are motivated by social approval. The relationship be-
tween normative outcomes and intentions is suppressed
because social desirability bias adds systematic variance
. to the normative outcome variable that is unrelated to
behavioral intentions (cf. Conger 1974). Formally,

H3a: The association between personal outcomes
and intentions is the same with direct and
indirect questioning because the variance
common to these variables is not subject to
social desirability bias.

H3b: Indirect questioning removes social desir-
ability variance from normative outcomes,
resulting in a stronger association between
normative outcomes and intentions under
this form of questioning.

Method

A two-group experiment was conducted in which the
single factor was questioning method. Data collection
procedures, the new product example, and the manip-
ulation of questioning method remained the same as
in study 1. Male and female undergraduate students
were randomly assigned to either the direct (” = 170)
or indirect (x = 182) groups. This sample was drawn
from a different university than that of study 1.

Measurement

Measures of personal and normative outcomes were
the same as those used in study 1. Intentions to adopt

 

 

 

150—-
140--
130--
120 Indirect
Personal
Outcomes 449+ ee
Direct
100-+-
90--
80--
70--
60->
boy
Yes No

Anonymity

early were measured with one indicator composed of
the summation of four self-report items. The four-item
directly worded scale included items such as “I will
probably purchase one of the new products soon after
they are on the market,” measured on a seven-point
“strongly agree” to “strongly disagree” scale. The in-
direct scale asked subjects to respond in terms of the
typical student. The coefficient alphas for this scale were
.93 (direct) and .81 (indirect). The means were 13.5
(direct) and 14.9 (indirect).

Results

Before testing the formal hypotheses, an analysis of
personal and normative outcome mean scores reveals
the same pattern of differences between groups found
in study 1. Specifically, the means for personal outcomes
are not significantly different across the direct and in-
direct questioning groups (Xgirect = 96.7, Xindirect = 101.2,
t = 1.5, NS), while the mean for normative outcomes
is significantly higher in the indirect group (Xuirect
= 39.4, Xindivect = 63.2, f = 8.72, p < .001, one-tailed
test). As in study 1, these results suggest a systematic
social desirability effect on normative outcome mean
scores with direct questioning.

Tests of differences in the estimated effects of personal
and normative outcomes on intentions in study 2 were
undertaken in two ways. First, given differences in the
ratio of the standard deviations for the predictor and
criterion variables across questioning groups, the ap-
propriate test of differences in the relationship between
outcomes and intentions is a comparison of product-
moment correlations across subgroups (Arnold 1982).
On the basis of Fisher’s Z-transformation, Hypothesis

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
310

3a is supported with no significant difference in the cor-
relation between personal outcomes and intentions
across groups (Fgirect = -432, Vindirect = -493, Z = .77, NS).
Hypothesis 3b is supported with a significantly higher
correlation between normative outcomes and intentions
in the indirect group (Vairecp = -269, Findirect = -442, Z
= 1.81, p < .05, one-tailed test). Second, an ordinary
least squares path analysis model was run for each
questioning-method group in which intention to early
adopt was regressed on personal and normative out-
comes. This analysis was performed to compare the pa-
rameter estimates that might result from path-analytic
studies under different questioning methods (see Table
3). Congruent with the study’s hypotheses, the stan-
dardized beta weight for normative outcomes on inten-
tions is higher in the indirect (6 = .332, t = 5.19, p
< .001) compared to the direct (6 = .205, ¢ = 2.94, p
< .001) groups. Additionally, the standardized beta
weights for personal outcomes on intentions are highly
similar across the indirect (8 = .402, ¢ = 6.30, p < .001)
and direct (8 = .399, ¢ = 5.73, p < .001) groups.

Discussion

Study 2 replicates the mean score results of study 1
with a significantly lower normative outcome mean in
the direct condition but no mean difference between
groups for personal outcomes. These results provide
further evidence of the effect of indirect questioning on
variables that are subject to social norms and expec-
tations. Further, subjects appear to make similar pre-
dictions for themselves and others about the likelihood
and importance of factors that are socially neutral. To-
gether, these results support the view that indirect ques-
tioning operates to reduce social desirability bias and
has no additional systematic effects on mean scores.

The results of this study also provide insights into
the effects of questioning method on relations between
variables that are socially sensitive and those that are
socially neutral. First, the absence of differences in the
association between personal outcomes and intentions
across the direct and indirect groups supports the ar-
gument that indirect questioning does not systemati-

‘cally bias relationships between socially neutral vari-
ables. The covariation between personal outcomes and
intentions was not significantly affected by questioning
method. Second, subjects appear to have systematically
understated the role of socially undesirable motivations
for consumption when questioned directly.

STUDY 3

The first objective of study 3 was to examine the ro-
bustness of the earlier results across product categories
and variations in question wordings. First, the norm
against social approval as a behavioral motivation op-
erates at a cultural level and so the tendency to un-
derreport the influence of others should not be product

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

TABLE 3

REGRESSION MODELS FOR DIRECT AND
INDIRECT GROUPS: STUDY 2

 

 

Independent variables

 

Dependent Personal Normative
Group variable outcome outcome
Direct (9 = 170) INT 399""* .205"**
Indirect (9 = 182) INT .402"** 3327"

 

Note.—Abbreviation as follows: INT, intentions.
"9 < 001.

specific. The effects observed in studies | and 2 fora
functional innovation (i.e., the new headphone product)
are therefore likely to exist for more expressive products
such as clothing and music. Second, the reluctance to
express one’s desire for the approval and recognition
of others should not depend on the source of influence
(i.e., referent). Although it is perhaps more socially ac-
ceptable to seek approval from family members, friends,
or co-workers than from ‘“‘others in general,” it is still
contrary to a favorable representation of the self. For-
mally,

H4: Social desirability bias operates to reduce di-
rect questioning estimates of the importance
of social approval across both (a) product cat-
egories and (}) influence sources.

The second objective of study 3 was to evaluate the
extent to which classical projection theory is able to
explain the results of the first two studies. Classical pro-
jection occurs when the individual denies possessing a
negative trait that is projected toward an out-group
rather than in-group target (Sherwood 1981). The in-
dividual distances himself or herself from the undesir-
able trait by attributing it to those who are socially dis-
tant rather than to the self or similar others. Results of
the first two studies are consistent with a classic pro-
jection interpretation insofar as subjects understated
(i.e., denied) the importance of social approval for
themselves and assigned significantly higher importance
levels to a typical other. Nevertheless, a complete test
of the classical projection hypothesis requires that sub-
jects not only attribute ‘higher levels of social approval
as a purchase motivation to an out-group target but
also deny the importance of social approval for an in- .
group target. Formally,

H5: Compared to self-ratings of the importance of
social approval as a consumption motivation,
subjects will predict that it is (a2) more im-
portant to an out-group target and () of equal
importance to an in-group target.

Method

A pretest was undertaken to identify expressive
products that would be widely accessible within the stu-

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

dent population. Twelve undergraduate students were
asked to rate the importance of social approval in the
brand decisions for a list of 25 products thought to be
relevant to this population. The five products with the
highest mean scores on a zero-to-six scale anchored by
“purchases influenced only by se/f” and “purchases
influenced only by others’? were selected for inclusion
in the main experiment. The five product categories
were athletic shoes, spring-break vacation destination,
music, hairstyle, and cologne/perfume.

A convenience sample of 75 male and female un-
dergraduate students were randomly assigned to one of
three groups (from 24 to 26 per group) that differed
only in the source of influence identified in the ques-
tions. Subjects in groups 1, 2, and 3 answered questions
that identified the source of influence as others, friends,
and their best friend, respectively. Subjects within each
group provided evaluations of the importance of social
approval for themselves, their best friend, and the typ-
ical student in the purchase of each of the five products
identified in the pretest. For example, the following
three question stems were used in group 1:

“It’s very important TO ME that OTHERS approve
of...”

“It’s very important TO MY BEST FRIEND that
OTHERS approve of . . .”

“It’s very important TO THE TYPICAL STUDENT
that OTHERS approve of . . .”

Questions were randomized within the groups to avoid
order bias.

Measurement

Items for the five expressive products were summed
to form a single indicator of the importance of social
influence for expressive products to simplify the pre-
sentation of the results and provide more reliable mea-
sures.* Scale characteristics are presented in Table 4.
As indicated, the internal consistency of the scales is
acceptable given that all alphas exceed .70 with only
one exception (.67).

The tendency to respond in a socially desirable man-
ner was measured with Reynolds’s (1982) short form
of the Marlowe-Crowne social desirability scale. The
scale comprises 13 culturally approved behaviors (five
worded positively and eight worded negatively) that
have a low probability of occurrence. The scale is ad-

 

‘This approach dramatically reduces the number of significance
tests but does not materially affect the overall results. Specifically,
using summated scales reduced the number of f-tests from 30 to six
and the number of associational tests from 45 to nine. Nevertheless,
the mean and associational results using summated scales are con-
sistent with the individual results. For the mean contrasts, 29 of 30
individual tests were consistent with the results reported for the sum-
mated scales. Of the nine associational tests, five results held for all
five products, two for four of five products, and two for three of five
products. Individual test results are available from the author.

311

TABLE 4
SCALE CHARACTERISTICS: STUDY 3

 

 

 

No. Actua!

Source of influence of scale Scale

and measure items range mean SD Alpha
Others (7 = 25):

SELF 5 0-24 13.0 6.4 67

BEST 5 2-25 12.8 6.1 72

TS 5 9-30 21.7 5.6 85
Friends (n = 26):

SELF 5 1-22 9.8 5.9 78

BEST 5 0-26 10.7 7A 82

TS 5 6-30 17.8 6.9 73
Best friend (n = 24):

SELF 5 0-20 10.8 6.5 78

BEST 5 0-20 11.3 6.4 82

TS 5 0-27 17.5 6.3 73
Overall (7 = 7):

SDR 13 0-11 4.49 2.78 69

 

Note.—Abbreviations are as follows: SELF, predictions about self; BEST,
predictions about best friend; TS, predictions about typical student; SDR, the
tendency to respond in a socially desirable manner as measured by the Marlowe-
Crowne short form.

ministered in a true or false format, and a high score
on the scale indicates the subject’s tendency to present
himself or herself in a socially favorable manner. Scale
characteristics are consistent with prior studies (e.g.,
Reynolds 1982; see Table 4).

Results

An examination of mean scores for the importance
of social approval in the purchase of expressive products
reveals the same pattern of results as studies 1 and 2.
Specifically, subjects consistently indicated that the
typical student is more motivated by social approval in
consumption behavior than they are themselves.
Through dependent /-tests, this difference was found
when the source of influence was others (Xgeir = 13.0,
Xypical student = 21.7, t=5.1 I, p< 001); friends (Xseir
= 9.8, Xiypicat student = 17.8, ¢ = 5.47, p < .001); and
best friend (Xsear = 10.8, Xtypicat smdent = 17.5, ¢ = 5.36,
p< .001). The results for the three groups are also clear
when the projective target was the subject’s best friend.
Predictions for the best friend were not significantly
different from the means for the self when the source
of influence was others (Xgeir = 13.0, Xpest friend = 12.8,
£= —.26, p> .10); friends (Xseir = 9.8, Xpest triena = 10.7,
t = .86, p> .10); and best friend (X,ep = 10.8, Xbest friend
= 11.3, = .61, p > .10).

The effects of social desirability bias on self-reports
and predictions about others were evaluated by regress-
ing the direct and indirect scales on the tendency to
respond in a socially desirable manner. All hypotheses
were directional, and thus all relational tests are one-
tailed. As summarized in Table 5, response tendency
was significantly associated with direct questions on so-

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
312

TABLE 5

EFFECTS OF SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS ON
PREDICTIONS ABOUT SELF, BEST FRIEND,
AND TYPICAL OTHER: STUDY 3

 

 

 

Independent
variable

Source of influence and dependent variable (SDR)
Others (n = 25):

SELF ~.37*

BEST —.49**

TS 10
Friends (n = 26):

SELF —.32*

BEST —.34*

TS —.16
Best friend (7 = 24):

SELF -47""

BEST ~.10

TS ~.06

 

NOTE.—Abbreviations are as follows: SELF, predictions about self; BEST,
predictions about best friend; TS, predictions about typical student; SDR, the
tendency to respond in a socially desirable manner as measured by the Marlowe-
Crowne short form.

*p < .05 {one-tailed test).

**p < .O1 (one-tailed test).

cial approval motives when the source of influence was
others (6 = —.37, t = —1.91, p < .05); friends (8 = —.32,
t= —1.68, p < .05); and best friend (8 = —.47, tf = —2.51,
p< .01). No significant association was found between
the tendency to respond in a socially desirable manner
and the indirect measures when the predictive target
was the typical student and the source of influence was
others (8 = .10, t = .47, p > .10); friends (8 = —.16, t
= —.80, p > .10); and best friend (6 = —.06, t = —.27,
p > .10). The results are less straightforward when the
predictive target was the subject’s best friend, with a
significant relationship when the source of influence was
others (8 = —.49, t = —2.74, p < .01) and friends (8
= —.34, t = —1.78, p < .05) but not best friend (¢
= —.10, 2 = —.46, p > .10).

Overall, the results support the hypotheses. For Hy-
pothesis 4a, the pattern of effects for direct and typical
student indirect questions is the same as was found in
the first two studies for a functional innovation. Subjects
in all three groups indicated that social approval for
expressive products was more important for the typical
student than for themselves. Also, the tendency to re-
spond in a socially desirable manner was significant for
all direct questions and nonsignificant for all indirect
questions in which the typical student was the projective
target. Hypothesis 4b is supported because the mean
and structural results supporting Hypothesis 4a were
consistent across all three sources of influence, namely,
others, friends, and best friend. Hypothesis 5a is sup-
ported with a significantly higher mean importance rat-
ing for the out-group rating compared to the self-rating.
Finally, Hypothesis 55 is supported given no significant

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

difference in the mean importance of social approval
between self and best friend reports. The combination
of the results of Hypothesis 5a and 5 suggests that sub-
jects engaged in classical projection when making pre-
dictions about a typical other.

Discussion

Study 3 reveals a pattern of results similar to that
found in studies | and 2 for mean scores on the im-
portance of social approval as a consumption motive.
Individuals consistently evaluated themselves as less
motivated by social approval than typical others. Con-
sidering all three studies, the mean results are compa-
rable across influence sources (i.e., others, friends, and
best friend), between- and within-subject designs, and
product categories. The results suggest predictable mean
differences between direct and indirect questions for
socially sensitive variables and no differences for socially
neutral variables.

The associational tests in study 3 support the above
interpretation. First, the tendency to respond in a so-
cially desirable manner was significantly associated with
direct measures of the influence of others, friends, and
best friend. In each case the inclination to bias responses
toward social norms resulted in lower self-reports of
social approval as a purchase motive. Second, response
tendency was not significantly associated with predic-
tions about the importance of social approval for the
typical student, regardless of the source of influence.

Analysis of the mean scores and social desirability
effects on indirect questions in which the predictive tar-
get was the subject’s best friend suggests that the re-
sponses were affected by social desirability bias in the
same direction and degree as direct questions. First, no
differences were found in the mean scores between self-
and best friend predictions across the three influence
sources. Second, the tendency to respond in a socially
desirable manner was found to have a significant neg-
ative effect on best friend predictions when the source
of influence was others and friends. These findings sup-
port the proposition that subjects engaged in classical
projection by denying an undesirable trait in themselves
and their best friend but attributing it to a socially dis-
tant other.

The one inconsistency in study 3 results is the finding
of no significant effect of response tendency on best
friend predictions when the source of influence was the
best friend’s best friend. This result may have occurred
because of the unique nature of the prediction required
for this question. To simplify the indirect wording it
was assumed that the best friend’s best friend was the
subject. On this basis, the question stem was “It’s very
important to MY BEST FRIEND that J approve
of . . .” The anomalous finding may have occurred
because the social norms governing the subject’s influ-
ence over his or her best friend are different than the
norms affecting other influence sources. Specifically, it

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

may be more acceptable for you to influence your best
friend than vice versa.

OVERALL DISCUSSION

Overall, it appears that indirect questions can be
constructed that are not significantly affected by social
desirability bias. All three studies produced results con-
sistent with the theory underlying indirect questioning.
First, responses to indirect questions in which the pro-
jective target is a typical other appear to reflect the self
as predicted by classical projection theory. Studies 1
and 2 found that subjects made systematically different
predictions for themselves and typical others for the
socially sensitive variable but not for the socially neutral
variable. The lack of systematic differences in both
variables for self- versus other predictions suggests that
the effect is not related to global subject-target differ-
ences. Additional support for the projection hypothesis
was found in study 3. Consistent with classical projec-
tion theory, subjects attributed an undesirable trait to
a typical other and denied the trait for themselves and
their best friend.

Second, the research provides some guidance as to
the use of indirect questions to measure socially sen-
sitive variables in consumer research. Although they
are not a measurement panacea, indirect methods may
increase our knowledge of the social context of purchase
behaviors when used in conjunction with direct ques-
tions. Specifically, using both types of measures should
increase our understanding of the significance and di-
rection of social norms governing a behavior. Also, the
use of two measurement approaches is consistent with
the recent call for multitrait-multimethod (MTMM)
matrices in consumer research (Bagozzi and Yi 1991).
The MTMM approach enables researchers to partition
systematic variance into its trait and nontrait compo-
nents, providing more rigorous evaluations of construct
validity and increasing the reliability of parameter es-
timates.

LIMITATIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR
FUTURE RESEARCH

The three studies reported here are subject to the same
limitations as other experimental designs using student
samples and cannot be generalized beyond the present
context. Social desirability bias may be of varying im-
portance depending on the population under consid-
eration (Park and Lessig 1977). Although the use of a
student sample in the present study is appropriate in-
sofar as a large percentage of consumer research is based
on student samples, research on other populations
would be useful. Moreover, the present study only con-
siders a motivation that is contrary to social norms. It
would be worthwhile to investigate the effects of social
desirability bias and questioning method on socially
acceptable attitudes and behaviors such as charity giving
and blood donation.

313

The social desirability effects found in this study may
be much stronger in other research contexts. First, my
findings point out that a relatively weak manipulation
of anonymity (i.e., the threat of possible follow-up) can
have a significant effect on subjects’ perceptions and
responses under direct questioning. Face-to-face inter-
views, focus groups, or even telephone interviews may
induce feelings of low anonymity that exert a strong
bias on directly worded questions. While more research
is needed on this subject, the result implies that aca-
demic and applied marketing researchers must be sen-
sitive to this issue in the design and execution of research
studies. Second, the subject matter is relatively benign
compared with a variety of recent investigations in con-
sumer behavior such as drug use and sexuality, plastic
surgery, and adolescent shoplifting. The stronger the
social norms governing the topic under investigation,
the more likely social desirability bias is to occur. The
combination of unanonymous research settings and so-
cially sensitive topics may be particularly troublesome.

Additionally, individual differences in subjects’ sus-
ceptibility to social influence may cause systematic
variations in perceived anonymity and the strength of
social norms governing a behavior. For example, be-
cause drinking and drug use norms are likely to vary
by sex within the undergraduate population, research
on this topic may find very different results depending
on whether a same- or opposite-sex interviewer is used.
Also, since susceptibility to social influence decreases
with age (Park and Lessig 1977), the bias may vary sys-
tematically from juniors to seniors in the undergraduate
population. Longitudinal research or designs that use
age as a predictor may reach false conclusions because
the systematic effects of social desirability bias are ex-
acerbated by the research design.

Further research is needed to examine the distinction
between projection and prediction more closely. Despite
the methodological difficulties associated with the task
(Holmes 1968), research is needed to distinguish be-
tween variance related to the self and variance related
to the predictive target in indirect questioning. Also,
future research is needed to investigate the impact of
factors such as information availability (Davis, Hoch,
and Ragsdale 1986), task involvement and account-
ability (Tetlock and Kim 1987), and explicit instruc-
tions to make objective predictions about others.

CONCLUSION

The three studies reported here differ significantly
from prior research on social desirability bias and in-
direct questioning. First, the experiments provide a
comparison of direct and indirect methods through
structured measures that differ only in wording “‘di-
rectness.” Second, the studies incorporate variables that
are a priori designated as either socially neutral or sen-
sitive. Third, the studies provide evidence of the effects
of social desirability bias on both mean scores and as-

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
314

sociations between variables. Fourth, the studies pro-
vide insights into the generality of effects across product
categories, influence sources, and experimental designs.
Overall, the research contributes to our understanding
of the validity of indirect questioning as a technique
for reducing social desirability bias and insights into
how consumers make predictions about others.

[Received August 1992. Revised February 1993.)

REFERENCES

Alpert, Mark L. (1971), “Identification of Determinant At-
tributes: A Comparison of Methods,” Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 8 (May), 184-191.

Anderson, James C. (1978), “The Validity of Haire’s Shopping
List Projective Technique,” Journal of Marketing Re-
search, 15 (Novembcr), 644-649,

Arnald, Hugh J. (1982), “Moderator Variables: A Clarification
of Conceptual, Analytic, and Psychometric Issues,’ Or-
ganizational Behavior and Human Performance, 29
(April), 143-174.

Bagozzi, Richard P. and Youjae Yi (1991), ““Multitrait-Mul-
timethod Matrices in Consumer Research,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 17 (March), 426-439.

Bearden, William O. and Michael J. Etzel (1982), ‘“‘Reference
Group Influence on Product and Brand Purchase Deci-
sions,” Journal of Consumer Research, 9 (September),
183-194.

Bentler, P. M. and Douglas G. Bonett (1980), ‘Significance
Tests and Goodness of Fit in the Analysis of Covariance
Structures,” Psychological Bulletin, 88 (November), 588-
606.

Brinberg, David and Linda Plimpton (1986), “Self-Monitor-
ing and Product Conspicuousness on Reference Group
Influence,” in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 13,
ed. Richard J. Lutz, Provo, UT: Association for Con-
sumer Research, 297-300.

Calder, Bobby J. and Robert E. Burnkrant (1977), ‘“Inter-
personal Influence on Consumer Behavior: An Attribu-
tion Theory Approach,” Journal of Consumer Research,
4 (June), 29-38.

Campbell, Donald T. (1950), ““The Indirect Assessment of
Social Attitudes,” Psychological Bulletin, 47 (January),
15-38.

Conger, Anthony J. (1974), ‘‘A Revised Definition for Sup-
pressor Variables: A Guide to their Identification and
Interpretation,” Educational and Psychological Mea-
surement, 34 (Spring), 35-46.

Cote, Joseph A. and M. Ronald Buckley (1988), ‘““Measure-
ment Error and Theory Testing in Consumer Research:
An Illustration of the Importance of Construct Valida-
tion,” Journal of Consumer Research, 14 (March), 579-
582.

Davis, Harry L., Stephen J. Hoch, and E. K. Easton Ragsdale
(1986), “An Anchoring and Adjustment Model of
Spousal Predictions,” Journal of Consumer Research, 13
(June), 25-37.

Fishbein, Martin and Icek Ajzen (1975), Belief, Attitude, In-
tention, and Behavior, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Fornell, Claes and David F. Larcker (1981), “Evaluating
Structural Equation Models with Unobservable Variables

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

and Measurement Error,” Journal of Marketing Re-
search, 18 (February), 39-50.

Haire, Mason (1950), “Projective Techniques in Marketing
Research,” Journal of Marketing, 14 (April), 649-656.

Havlena, William J. and Morris B. Holbrook (1986), “‘The
Varieties of Consumption Expcricnce: Comparing Two
Typologies of Emotion in Consumer Behavior,” Journal
of Consumer Research, 13 (December), 394-404.

Holmes, David S. (1968), “Dimensions of Projection,” Psy-
chological Bulletin, 69 (April), 248-268.

Kassarjian, Harold H. (1974), “Projective Methods,” in
Handbook of Marketing Research, ed. Robert Ferber,
New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 3-85 to 3-100.

Kelman, Herbert C. (1961), ‘““Proccss of Opinion Change,”
Public Opinion Quarterly, 25 (Spring), 57-78.

Levy, Sidney J. (1981), “Interpreting Consumer Mythology:
A Structural Approach to Consumer Behavior,” Journal
of Marketing, 45 (Summer), 49-61.

Maccoby, Eleanor E. and Nathan Maccoby (1954), “The In-
terview: A Tool of Social Science,” in Handbook of Social
Psychology, Vol. 1, ed. Gardiner Lindzey, Cambridge,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 449-487.

Mensch, Barbara S. and Denise B. Kandel (1988), ‘“‘Underre-
porting of Substance Use in a National Longitudinal
Youth Cohort,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 52 (Spring),
100-124.

Miniard, Paul W. and Joel B. Cohen (1983), ‘“Modeling Per-
sonal and Normative Influences on Behavior,” Journal
of Consumer Research, 10 (September), 169-180.

Park, C. Whan and V. Parker Lessig (1977), “Students and
Housewives: Differences in Susceptibility to Reference
Group Influence,” Journal of Consumer Research, 4
(September), 102-110.

Paulhus, Delroy L. (1984), ‘“‘Two-Component Madels of So-
cially Desirable Responding,” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 46 (March), 598-609.

Peltier, B. David and James A. Walsh (1990), “An Investi-
gation of Response Bias in the Chapman Scales,”” Edu-
cational and Psychological Measurement, 50 (Winter),
803-815.

Peterson, Robert A. and Roger A. Kerin (1981), ““The Quality
of Self-Report Data: Review and Synthesis,” in Review
of Marketing, ed. Ben M. Enis and Kenneth J. Roering,
Chicago: American Marketing Association, 5-20.

Reynolds, William M. (1982), “Development of Reliable and
Valid Short Forms of the Marlowe-Crowne Social De-
sirability Scale,” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 38 (Jan-
uary), 119-125.

Robcrtson, Dan H. and Robert W. Joselyn (1974), “‘Projective
Techniques in Research,” Journal of Advertising Re-
search, 14 (October), 27-31.

Robinette, Randy L. (1991), “The Relationship between the
Marlowe-Crowne Form C and the Validity Scales of the
MMPI,” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 47 (May), 396~
399,

Rokeach, Milton (1979), Understanding Human Values, New
York: Free Press.

- and Sandra J. Ball-Rokeach (1989), “Stability and
Change in American Value Priorities,” American Psy-
chologist, 44 (May), 775-784.

Rook, Dennis (1985), ‘““The Ritual Dimension of Consumer
Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research, 12 (Decem-
ber), 251~264.

 

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS

Sherwood, Gregory G. (1981), “Self-serving Biascs in Person
Perception: A Reexamination of Projection as a Mcch-
anism of Defense,” Psychological Bulletin, 90 (Novem-
ber), 445-459,

Simon, Julian and Rita Simon (1975), “The Effect of Money
Incentives on Family Size: A Hypothetical-Question
Study,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 38 (Winter), 585-595.

Steele, Howard (1964), “On the Validity of Indirect Ques-
tions,” Journal of Marketing Research, 28 (August), 46-
49,

Tetlock, Phillip E. and Jae Il Kim (1987), ‘Accountability

315

and Judgement Processes in a Personality Prediction
Task,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52
(April), 700-709.

Westfall, Ralph L., Harper W. Boyd, Jr., and Donald T.
Campbell (1957), ‘““The Use of Structured Techniques in
Motivation Research,” Journal of Marketing, 22 (Oc-
tober), 134-139.

Zerbe, Wilfred J. and Delroy L. Paulhus (1987), ‘Socially
Desirable Responding in Organizational Behavior: A
Reconception,” Academy of Management Review, 12
(April), 250-264.

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:08:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
