Society for

Research i
Child Development W | L_ E Y

 

Social Cognitive Biases and Deficits in Aggressive Boys

Author(s): Kenneth A. Dodge and Cynthia L. Frame

Source: Child Development, Jun., 1982, Vol. 53, No. 3 (Jun., 1982), pp. 620-635
Published by: Wiley on behalf of the Society for Research in Child Development

 

 

 

Stable URL: fhttps://www.jstor.org/stable/1129373

 

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Society for Research in Child Development and Wiley are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Child Development

 

JSTOR

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Social Cognitive Biases and Deficits in

Aggressive Boys

Kenneth A. Dodge and Cynthia L. Frame

Indiana University

Donce, Kennetu A., and Frame, Cynrura L. Social Cognitive Biases and Deficits in Aggres-
sive Boys. Curt DEVELOPMENT, 1982, 53, 620-635. 3 studies are reported which assess the
nature and limits of a known bias on the part of aggressive boys to overattribute hostile in-
tentions to peers. The first study determined that this bias is restricted to attributions of a
peer’s behavior toward an aggressive boy, and not to attributions of a peer’s behavior toward
a second peer. Biased attributions were implicated as a direct precedent to aggressive responses.
The second study assessed the role of selective attention to and recall of hostile social cues
in the formation of a biased attribution. It was found that selective recall of hostile cues did
lead to a biased attribution, but that selective recall did not fully account for the attributional
differences between aggressive and nonaggressive boys. Also, specific deficits in recall by ag-
gressive boys were identified. The third study involved naturalistic observation of the peer-
directed aggressive behaviors of boys in a controlled setting. It was found that the biased
attributions of aggressive boys may have some basis in their experience, in that they were
frequently the targets of peers’ aggressive behavior. Their own aggressive behavior toward

peers, however, occurred at a much higher rate than the rate at which they were the targets
of aggression. These findings led to the formation of a social-information-processing model of

aggressive behavior.

The relation between social cognitive vari-
ables and aggressive behavior in boys has re-
ceived increasing attention over the past decade
(see Camp 1977; Feshbach 1970; Hartup 1974).
As Berkowitz (1977) has maintained, a frus-
trating social stimulus is a cue for an aggressive
response only if the child attributes hostile in-
tent to the stimulus person. A number of studies
have demonstrated this phenomenon in a vari-
ety of contexts (Berndt 1977; Darley, Klossen,
& Zanna 1978; Feshbach & Feshbach 1969;
Mallick & McCandless 1966; Rule, Nesdale, &
McAra 1974),

Several researchers have suggested that in-
dividual differences in children’s retaliatory ag-
gressive behavior may be related to differences
in social cognitive skills (Chandler 1973; Fesh-
bach 1970; Selman 1976). These researchers
have typically hypothesized that inappropriate
aggressive behavior in children occurs as a
function of a developmental lag in the acquisi-
tion of social role-taking skills.

Data supporting an alternative but related
hypothesis of inappropriate aggression has been

presented recently by Dodge (1980). The es-
sence of this hypothesis is that the social cog-
nitions of aggressive children are biased. These
children tend to overattribute hostile intentions
to peers, even in circumstances in which a hos-
tile attribution is not warranted. In one study,
Dodge exposed aggressive and nonaggressive
boys to a frustrating outcome instigated by an
ambiguously intentioned peer. In response to
the ambiguous provocation, aggressive boys
demonstrated a bias toward attributing a hos-
tile intention to the peer. Also, this attributional
bias directly mediated the retaliatory aggres-
sive behavior of these boys. As a result, they
displayed retaliatory aggressive behavior more
frequently than did nonaggressive boys. The
finding that aggressive boys tend to overattrib-
ute hostile intentions to others has been repli-
cated recently in different contexts by Dodge
and Newman (1981) and Nasby, Hayden, and
dePaulo (1980). The present paper describes
three studies that explore further the nature
and causes of attributional bias in aggressive
boys. These studies lead to a general model of

Support for this research was provided by a research grant from the Spencer Foundation

and research grant MH-34381 from the National Institute of Mental Health, U.S. Public
Health Service, each awarded to the senior author. The authors wish to acknowledge the
support of the teachers and administration of the Monroe County Community School Corpo-
ration, and the assistance of Paul Brakke, Brian Burke, Ruth Haney, Kathy Mahoney, Elizabeth
McDonel, Joseph Newman, and Scott Robbins. Requests for reprints should be addressed to
Kenneth A. Dodge, Department of Psychology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405.

{Child Development, 1982, 53, 620-635. © 1982 by the Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/82/5303-0013$01.00]

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
the relation between social information process-
ing and aggressive behavior.

Study 1

In the original attributional study by
Dodge (1980), aggressive and nonaggressive
boys were presented with hypothetical stories
in which they were to imagine that they were
subjected to a negative outcome (e.g., being hit
in the back by a ball) which was the result of
an ambiguous behavior by a peer. In that study,
all outcomes were directed at the subject. It
was not possible to determine, therefore, wheth-
er the attributional bias of aggressive boys rep-
resented an expectation that peers will act with
hostile intent toward all others (a cynical view
of their peers) or an expectation that peers will
act with hostile intent only toward the subject
(a paranoid view of their peers). In the present
study, aggressive and nonaggressive boys were
presented with hypothetical stories in which a
frustrating outcome instigated by a peer was
directed toward either the subject or a sec-
ond peer.

Another facet of the original study was
that the outcome of the hypothetical story was
clearly negative. In the present study, half of
the stories had clearly negative outcomes and
half had ambiguous outcomes that could have
negative, neutral, or positive interpretations
(e.g., seeing a peer holding a pencil that the sub-
ject had lost), This manipulation was thought
to be important because it could help determine
the role of the negative outcome in the genera-
tion of biases in attributions. If the attribu-
tional bias of aggressive boys in negative-out-
come situations represents a general tendency
to attribute intentional (rather than accidental)
behavior to a peer, then an ambiguous outcome
stimulus should lead aggressive boys to make
both hostile and benevolent, but always inten-
tional, attributions about the peer. On the other
hand, if the previous finding represents a bias by
aggressive boys toward hostile attributions, then
aggressive boys should overattribute hostility to
peers even in ambiguous outcome situations.

Finally, in the original study by Dodge,
the status of the peer instigator of the outcome
also had a profound impact on subjects’ attribu-
tions and responses. When the peer had a repu-
tation as an aggressive child, subjects tended to
attribute hostility to his behavior and frequently
retaliated aggressively toward him. When the
peer was a nonaggressive child, subjects usually
attributed his behavior to benign intentions and
did not retaliate. In order to replicate and ex-

Dodge and Frame 621

tend this finding, the status of the peer insti-
gator was manipulated in the present study.

Method

Subjects—Subjects were selected on the
joint bases of peer sociometric nominations and
classrcom teacher assessment of students’ be-
havior. Each of 551 students from the kinder-
garten through fifth-grade classes of two public
elementary schools was administered a socio-
metric interview, following the receipt of par-
ental permission. Students were asked to name,
with the aid of a roster, three classmates whom
they liked most, three whom they liked least,
and two classmates who best fit each of two
behavioral descriptions. One description con-
cerned aggressive behavior (“This child starts
fights and hits other kids”) and the other con-
cemed prosocial, nonaggressive behavior. Scores
for each category, computed as the sum of all
nominations received in a category, have been
shown to have 12-week test-retest reliabilities
averaging .74 (Dodge, Note 1).

Teachers were asked to assess the behavior
of each student by indicating on two nine-point
scales the favorability of each student’s social
relationships and the frequency of each stu-
dent’s aggressive behavior.

In order to be selected as aggressive, a boy
had to be placed above the median of his teach-
er’s ratings on the aggression question and be-
low the median on the favorability of social re-
lations questions. From this pool, the 15 boys
in each of three grade groups (K-1, 2-3, and
4-5) whose peer nomination scores for ag-
gression were highest and whose prosocial and
liking scores were low were selected as the ag-
gressive sample. Only boys were selected since
the total pool of aggressive children was pre-
dominantly male. One-fifth of the sample was
of minority racial status. The nonaggressive
sample of boys was matched to the aggressive
sample by race and classroom, and was sim-
ilarly selected on the bases of teacher ratings
and peer nominations, using opposite criteria.

This method of subject selection has been
used previously (Dodge 1980), and has been
found to predict actual aggressive behavior,
both in the classroom and on the playground
(Dodge & Coie, Note 2). Of the 90 boys se-
lected, 81 (90%) agreed to participate in the
study, which involved attending a session at a
university laboratory.

Procedure.—Each subject was brought to
a private room and was assured of the confiden-
tiality of his responses. He was told that he

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
622 Child Development

would hear eight imaginary stories and that he
would be asked several questions about each

story.

For each story, the subject was told to
imagine that a specific peer was involved in an
activity in which a particular outcome occurred.
The stories varied in outcome valence (negative
vs. ambiguous), locus of outcome (directed at
the subject vs. directed at a second peer), and
status of peer instigator (aggressive vs. non-
aggressive). Two negative-outcome valence
stories, identical to those used by Dodge (1980),
and two ambiguous-outcome stories were writ-
ten as stimuli. For the negative-outcome stories
directed at the subject, the subject was to imag-
ine: (a) standing on the playground and get-
ting hit hard in the back with a ball thrown by
a peer, and (b) sitting at the lunch table and
having a peer’s milk carton spill milk all over
his back. For the ambiguous-outcome stories,
the subject was to imagine: (a) losing a pencil
and then later seeing a peer holding it in his
hand, and (b) placing his lunch bag on a table,
leaving, and then returning to see a peer hold-
ing the lunch bag. These four stories were also
written so that the subject was to imagine that
he observed the peer direct the action at a
second, unspecified peer who experienced the
outcome.

The peer instigator in each story was the
name of a child in the subject’s classroom. Four
boys from the pool of those fitting the criteria
as aggressive and four boys fitting the criteria
as nonaggressive were selected as peer instiga-
tors. When fewer than four peers of either sta-
tus could be identified, the same names were
used more than once as peer instigators. One
aggressive and one nonaggressive name was at-
tached to each of the four story types, yieldin
eight stories. The eight stories were presente
to each subject in an order that was counter-
balanced across subjects. The experimenter was
blind to the status of the subject and to the
status of each peer instigator.

The subject’s tasks for each story were to
decide how the outcome had occurred and how
he would probably behaviorally respond to the
outcome. The subject’s responses were probed
in a nonleading direction until the experimenter
could score them satisfactorily. All responses
were recorded verbatim and were also audio
recorded. The subject’s response to the ques-
tion of how the outcome occurred constituted
his attribution of the peer’s intention. This re-
sponse was scored as 2 if he indicated that the
peer had acted maliciously and with hostile in-

tention, 1 if he indicated that the peer had
acted with benign intention or accidentally, and
0 if he indicated that the peer had been trying
to act benevolently. The subject’s response to
the question of how he would behaviorally re-
spond was scored as 2 if he indicated that he
would retaliate aggressively toward the peer,
1 if he indicated that he would do nothing to
the peer, and 0 if he indicated that he would
act positively toward the peer.

A second coder listened to the audio rec-
ord of the responses of 15 subjects chosen ran-
domly (240 responses) and independently
scored the responses. The second coder agreed
with the experimenter in 226 cases (94%). The
scores coded by the experimenter were used as
the dependent measures.

Results

The two dependent measures were con-
sidered to be continuous variables, and were
assessed by analyses of variance, in which sub-
ject status (aggressive vs. nonaggressive) and
grade level (K-1, 2-3, or 4-5) were between-
subjects factors, and outcome valence (negative
vs. ambiguous), locus of outcome (self-directed
vs. other-directed), and status of target (ag-
gressive vs. nonaggressive) were within-subject
factors. Chi-square analyses were also per-
formed to investigate further subjects’ response
tendencies and to assess the relation between
the two dependent measures.

Attributions of intention—The analysis of
variance in attributions of intention revealed a
significant main effect of status of target, F(1,75)
=: 4.48, p< .04, Group means revealed that
when an aggressive boy was the peer who in-
stigated an outcome, subjects attributed more
hostility to his behavior (M = 1.48) than they
did when a nonaggressive boy instigated the
same outcome (M = 1.38). A significant main
effect of outcome valence, F(1,75) = 6.59, p <
-02, indicated that subjects attributed more hos-
tility to instigators when the outcome was neg-
ative (M = 1.49) than when it was ambiguous
(M = 1.87). No other main effects were found.

A significant interaction between subject
status and locus of outcome was found, F (1,75)
= 6.51, p < .02, and is depicted in figure 1. A
Newman-Keuls analysis of the group means of
this interaction revealed that when the story
outcome was directed at the subject, aggressive
subjects attributed more hostility to the peer
than did nonaggressive subjects, p< .05. On
the other hand, when the story outcome was
directed at a second peer, aggressive subjects
did not differ from nonaggressive subjects in

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
(HOSTILE)

Aggressive Subjects

4.40
thy
Nonaggressive Subjects

MEAN ATTRIBUTION
on

35

| TC
{BENIGN

Other-Directed Self-Directed

LOCUS OF BEHAVIORAL OUTCOME
Fic. 1.—Subjects’ attributions of peers’ inten-
tions as a function of the subject’s status and the
locus of behavioral outcome.

their attributions of hostility. These results rep-
licate those of Dodge (1980) by showing that,
following provocations by peers toward the sub-
ject, aggressive boys attribute hostility to peers
more frequently than do nonaggressive boys.
These results extend previous findings by dem-
onstrating that the attributions of aggressive
boys differ from those of nonaggressive boys
only when a peer directs an action toward the
subject, and not when the subject acts as an
observer of an action that is directed toward a
second peer.

Retaliation —The analysis of variance in
subjects’ stated behavioral responses to the
stories revealed several main effects. Subjects’
responses indicated more aggressive retaliation
when the story had a clearly negative outcome
than when it had an ambiguous outcome,
F (1,75) = 65.00, p <.001. A significant main
effect of locus of outcome, F (1,75) = 8.29, p<
.01, indicated that subjects felt that a second
peer was more likely to retaliate aggressively
than they were. A marginally significant main
effect of status of subject was found, F (1,75)
= 3.20, p< .08. The responses of aggressive
subjects (M = 1.34) indicated more aggressive
retaliation than did those of nonaggressive sub-
jects (M = 1.28). Finally, a main effect of sta-
tus of peer instigator was found, F(1,75) =
7.42, p<.01. Subjects’ responses indicated
more aggressive retaliation when the peer in-
stigator was an aggressive boy (M = 1.82)
than when he was a nonaggressive boy (1.26).

To investigate further subjects’ responses
when a boy said he would do nothing directly
to the peer (ie., those responses scored as “1”),

Dodge and Frame 623

two coders subscored the “1” responses as either
“telling the teacher” or “not telling the teacher.”
Agreement for this coding was nearly perfect.
Chi-square analyses of this distinction with the
major independent variables were performed.
These analyses revealed that even when sub-
jects said they would do nothing directly to the
peer, they more frequently said they would tell
the teacher about the outcome when the peer
instigator was an aggressive boy (52% of cases)
than when he was a nonaggressive boy (34% of
cases), x?(1) = 15.77, p < 01.

Mediating role of the attribution of inten-
tion.—Chi-square analyses were performed to
investigate the mediating role of the attribution
made by a subject in the generation of his
stated behavioral response. These analyses indi-
cated that when subjects attributed a hostile
intention to the peer, they said they would re-
taliate (directly or by telling the teacher) in
73% of the cases, whereas when they attributed
a benign or positive intention to the peer, they
said they would retaliate in only 87% of the
cases, y?(6) = 102.09, p < .001. This relation-
ship held for each subject group separately, and
in each condition (each x? significant at the
.O1 level).

Further analyses of the relation between
subject status and behavioral response, con-
trolling for the subject’s attribution of the peer’s
intention, were conducted to investigate the
role of the subject’s attributions in this relation-
ship. Chi-square analyses were computed sep-
arately at each level of attribution of intention
(hostile, accidental, and positive). All three
analyses yielded nonsignificant y's, indicating
that the differences in subjects’ behavioral re-
sponses were accounted for by differences in
their attributions of the peer’s intention.

Discussion

The presents study extends previous work
by specifying the nature and limits of attribu-
tional bias in aggressive boys. Whereas the ag-
gressive subjects in this study overattributed
hostility to peers (relative to nonaggressive sub-
jects) when they were recipients of an outcome,
the aggressive subjects did not demonstrate an
attributional bias when they acted as observers
to an event that was directed at a second peer.
We must conclude that the attributional bias in
aggressive boys is limited to circumstances in
which actions and outcomes are directed at the
aggressive bey. Two explanations of this finding
seem plausible. On occasions when aggressive
boys are participants in an event, the act of par-
ticipating may interfere with their social infor-

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
624 Child Development

mation processing and lead to deviant attribu-
tions. Alternatively, attributional bias in this
circumstance may represent an expectancy on
the part of aggressive boys that peers will be-
have in hostile ways only toward them. The
aggressive boys may be paranoid in this respect.

The attributions and responses of subjects
toward aggressive boys suggest that the attribu-
tions that aggressive boys make may be well
founded. Apparently, most boys expect that ag-
gressive boys will act aggressively. They attrib-
uted hostile intentions to the behavior of those
boys, and they reported that they would behave
aggressively toward them. Is there behavioral
reality to the statements of these boys and to
the expectations of aggressive boys? Are they
the targets, as well as the instigators, of most
aggressive behavior? This question was directly
addressed in a naturalistic observation study re-
ported as the third study in this paper.

First, however, it is relevant to explore
further the social information processing of ag-
gressive boys. The findings of this study do not
provide support for the notion that the attribu-
tional bias of aggressive boys represents a def-
icit in social-role-taking skill, or that it repre-
sents a general cognitive developmental lag. If
either of these explanations were true, the at-
tributions of aggressive boys would be deviant
in all cases, and we would not find a strong
relationship between their attributions and their
behavior.

The data also do not support the hypoth-
esis that aggressive boys merely match attribu-
tions of intentionality with outcomes, a ten-
dency that might represent a Piagetian (Piaget
1965) stage of relative cognitive immaturity. If
this were the case, aggressive boys would not
have been likely to attribute hostility to peers
when the outcome was ambiguous and not nec-
essarily negative. But even in this condition of
the study, aggressive boys displayed an attribu-
tional bias toward hostility.

On the other hand, the social cognitive ac-
tivities of aggressive boys still may differ from
those of nonaggressive boys. The aggressive
boys apparently process social stimuli differ-
ently from nonaggressive boys. Is there a pre-
ceding cognitive process that contributes to the
attributional bias that is displayed in aggressive
boys? Data presented by Zadney and Gerard
(1974) and Dodge and Newman (1981) dem-
onstrate that biased attributions may occur as
a function of selective recall of biased portions
of a social cue. Is it that aggressive boys selec-

tively recall the hostile portions of their social
environment, and that this selective recall leads
to biased interpretations of their environment?
This question provided the basis for the second
study reported in this paper.

Study 2

The reasoning outlined above suggests two
hypotheses. First, if aggressive boys are pre-
sented an array of hostile and benevolent social
cues, they should selectively recall the hostile
cues. Second, if those boys are later asked to
make valenced attributions about the peers who
had displayed the cues, those attributions
should be made as a function of the cues that
the boys selectively recalled. To test these hy-
potheses, aggressive and nonaggressive boys
were presented a videotaped stimulus in which
they saw and heard an unknown peer make
hostile, neutral, and benevolent statements in
the context of an interview. The subjects were
asked to recall the statements they had heard,
were given a recognition test of their memory
for presented statements, and were asked to
make valenced attributions about the peer’s
probable future behavior toward them and to-
ward another peer.

This procedure allowed us to assess both
cognitive biases and cognitive deficits in aggres-
sive boys. Biases were assessed by examining
the ratio of benevolent to hostile cues recalled
by each subject group. Deficits were assessed by
examining total recall, errors of intrusion into
free recall, and recognition accuracy (both false
positives and false negatives).

In addition to the between-subjects factors
of grade level and status of subjects, two with-
in-subject factors were also manipulated. Be-
cause the status of the peer instigator of be-
havior has been shown to have a dramatic effect
on subjects’ attributions, it was hypothesized
that this factor would also have an effect on
subjects’ selective recall of cues. This factor was
manipulated by the experimenter who, prior to
presenting a videotaped stimulus, described the
boy in the videotape as an aggressive child or
a popular, nonaggressive child, or did not de-
scribe the boy. In order to assess further the
relation between the kinds of cues a subject
heard and his attribution about the child dis-
playing the cues, the balance of hostile to be-
nevolent cues displayed by the stimulus child
was also manipulated. This balance was either
weighted positively or negatively, or equally.
In all, each subject heard nine stimulus tapes.

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Method

Subjects——Of the 81 boys who partic-
ipated in the first study, 80 also participated in
this study. As in the first study, these boys were
aggressive or nonaggressive, and came from one
of three grade groupings (K-1, 2-8, or 4-5).

Stimuli —Prior to the administration of the
experiment, videotaped stimuli were prepared.
Each stimulus was described to subjects as an
interview by a female adult with a boy actor.
The adult began each interview by asking the
boy to “describe things that (he) did with kids
in (his) classroom.” The boy then responded
with nine statements, each describing a behav-
ior. The statements the boy made were written
by a panel of five graduate students. Initially,
200 statements were written, 75 of which de-
scribed benevolent acts that the boy had dis-
played toward a particular peer (e.g., “Yester-
day I had an extra cookie for lunch so I shared
it with my friend Billy”), 75 of which described
hostile acts (e.g., “This morning I kicked a boy
named Joshua because he is ugly”), and 50 of
which described neutral acts (e.g., “I sit in
front of this boy Derek in school every day”).
The benevolent and hostile statements were
meant to describe common behaviors with out-
comes of approximately equal severity. In each

statement, a peer was named and an act was
described.

In order to assess the valence and severity
of each statement, the 200 statements were
then presented to 50 undergraduates who rated
each statement on a 1-5 scale, with 1 being ob-
viously benevolent, 2 being somewhat benev-
olent, 3 being neutral, 4 being somewhat hos-
tile, and 5 being obviously hostile. Based on
these ratings, 45 statements were selected as
most obviously hostile (mean rating = 4.4), 45
as most obviously benevolent (mean rating =
1.5), and 27 as neutral (mean rating = 2.9).
These statements were selected for use in the
study and each was assigned randomly to one
of nine groups, with five benevolent, five hos-
tile, and three neutral statements in each group.

From the 13 statements in a group, three
interviews were written. A benevolently bal-
anced interview contained five benevolent, two
neutral, and two hostile statements. A hostile
interview contained five hostile, two neutral,
and two benevolent statements. A neutral inter-
view contained three statements of each type.
The statements in the benevolent interview
were combined in one of three orders. The
order of statements in the hostile interview mir-
rored that in the benevolent interview, with a

Dodge and Frame 625
hostile statement replacing a benevolent state-
ment and vice versa. The statements in the neu-
tral interview were also combined in three or-
ders. The statements were altered slightly at
this time, so that they flowed smoothly within
an interview.

Nine 10-year-old boys were then recruited
to act out the interviews. Each boy acted out
three interviews in a particular group, one be-
nevolently balanced, one neutral, and one hos-
tile. Boys memorized scripts and were coached
in verbal expression. This procedure yielded 27
videotaped interviews (9 boys x 3 interview
types). During the course of the experiment,
each subject viewed nine of these interviews,
one with each of the nine boy actors. Of these
nine interviews, three were benevolently bal-
anced, three were hostile, and three were neu-
tral. The interviews were chosen in a system-
atic counterbalanced order which was similar
for all subject groups.

In addition to the variations in the inter-
views, the female experimenter also manip-
ulated the label associated with the boy actors
by her description of the boy to the subject
prior to presentation. In one third of the inter-
views, the actor was described as a popular boy
who got along well with his peers (popular).
In another third, he was described as a boy
who frequently got into fights with peers (ag-
gressive). In the remaining third, he was not
described at all (no information). This factor
was crossed with the balance of stimulus cues,
yielding a 3 (balance of stimulus cues—benev-
olent, neutral, or hostile) x 3 (labels—pop-
ular, aggressive, or no information) array of in-
terviews in a counterbalanced order. Also, the
nine interviews were presented to subjects in
an order that was counterbalanced within sub-
ject groups.

Procedure.—Each subject was brought to
a private room in a university laboratory by a
female experimenter (blind to the subject’s sta-
tus) and was told that he would view a number
of videotaped interviews with boys that he did
not know. Actors and subjects were drawn from
different schools to ensure anonymity. For each
interview, the subject’s tasks were to view the
minute-long interview and to try to remember
all that the boy said. Following the presenta-
tion of an interview, the subject was asked to
recall as many of the things that the boy said
as he could. The subject’s responses were re-
corded on audiotape. These responses were
later transcribed and scored, and constituted
the free-recall dependent measure.

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
626 Child Development

When the subject could recall no more
statements, he was given a short recognition
task. The experimenter presented four state-
ments one at a time to the subject, whose task
was to respond yes or no to the question of
whether the boy in the interview had made that
statement. Two of the statements actually had
occurred in the interview, and two had not. The
two nonoccurring statements were drawn from
nonpresented interviews. Also, two statements
described benevolent acts, and two described
hostile acts. The four statements formed a 2
(occurred vs. not occurred) x 2 (benevolent
vs. hostile) array, for later factorial analysis.
The four statements were presented in a ran-
dom order that was varied across interviews but
was similar for all subject groups.

Following the recognition task, the subject
was presented with four hypothetical attribu-
tional questions about the boy in the interview.
For two of the questions, the subject was asked
whether he thought that the boy would prob-
ably display a particular benevolent act in the
future (e.g., “If you met this boy, do you think
that he would let you ride his bicycle?”). For
the other two questions, the subject was asked
about a hostile act (e.g., “Do you think that
this boy would call kids bad names?”). In order
to be sensitive to the distinction between self-
directed and other-directed acts that was found
to be a critical factor in the first study, two of
the questions described acts potentially directed
at the subject (as in the first example above),
and two were directed at a second peer (as in
the second example above). The four questions
thus formed a 2 (benevolent vs. hostile act) x
2 (self-directed vs. other-directed) array. The
questions were asked in a counterbalanced
order.

This procedure was repeated for each of
nine stimulus interviews. At the completion of
the experiment, each subject was told that the
boys in the interviews were actors and that each
boy was actually quite cooperative. The subject
was paid for his participation.

Scoring of recall measure—Using verba-
tim transcripts of the subject’s free-recall re-
sponses, a graduate student scored each re-
sponse in two ways. First, each response was
scored as one of the following, in reference to
the actor: (a) recall of a benevolent act as
stated by the actor; (b) recall of a neutral act
as stated by the actor; (c) recall of a hostile
act as stated by the actor; or (d) statement that
the actor did not make, but was made up by
the subject (called an intrusion). Second, each

response was scored as one of the following, in
reference to the subject’s version of recalled
statements: (a) response of a benevolent act as
stated by the subject; (b) response of a neutral
act as stated by the subject; or (c) response of
a hostile act as stated by the subject. Since the
two scoring procedures yielded highly similar
results, only the results using the first procedure
are reported. A second graduate student also
scored the responses of 15 subjects, about 500
responses in all, for purposes of reliability. The
two scorers agreed over 90% of the time, so the
scores by the first scorer were deemed reliable,
and were used in all analyses.

Results

Free recall—The frequencies of benev-
olent, neutral, and hostile statements recalled,
along with the frequency of intrusions, were
calculated for each interview presented. These
four frequency scores served as dependent mea-
sures in four analyses of variance (ANOVA),
in which subject status (aggressive vs. nonag-
gressive) and grade (K-l, 2-3, or 4-5) were
between-subjects factors and balance of stim-
ulus cues (benevolent, neutral, or hostile) and
label of actor (popular, aggressive, or no infor-
mation) were within-subject factors.

The percent recall of the valenced cues
and the mean frequency of intrusions are dis-
played in table 1. As shown in that table, when
the actor in the interview was labeled to the
subject as a popular child, subjects recalled
more benevolent cues than when the actor was
labeled as an aggressive child or was not la-
beled at all, F(2,148) = 4.16, p < .02. On the
other hand, subjects recalled more hostile cues
when the actor was labeled as an aggressive

TABLE 1

RECALL OF VALENCED STIMULI AND FREQUENCY OF
RECALL INTRUSIONS AMONG SUBJECT GroUPsS

 

 

 

SUBJECT StTrmmutus CuE Type
AND —_-.-
ACTOR Benev- Neu- Hos-  Intrv-
STATUS olent tral tile sions?
Aggressive:
Popular...... Al 39 41 14
Noinformation 33 42 41 14
Ageressive.... 36 40 47 13
Nonaggressive:
Popular...... 39 40 39 09
Noinformation 34 37 42 04
Aggressive.... 35 38 46 07

 

= Each figure represents the mean percent of presented cues
recalled for each group.

b Fach figure represents the mean frequency per stimulus for
each group.

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
child than when he was labeled as a popular
child or was not labeled, F (2,148) = 4.33, p <
.02. In other words, subjects were biased to-
ward the recall of cues that were consistent
with the label given to the stimulus person in
the interview. Recall of neutral cues did not
vary with the actor’s label.

Contrary to hypotheses, aggressive sub-
jects were not significantly more biased toward
the recall of hostile cues than were nonaggres-
sive subjects. Aggressive subjects recalled 18%
more hostile cues than benevolent cues, where-
as nonaggressive subjects recalled 17% more
hostile cues than benevolent cues. In other
words, both subject groups were biased toward
the recall of hostile cues over benevolent cues.

As expected, subjects’ recall of all cues im-
proved with advancing grade level, for benev-
olent cues, F (2,74) = 17.08, p < .001, for neu-
tral cues, F(2,74) = 2.74, p< .07, and for
hostile cues, F(2,74) = 47.28, p< .001. Also
as expected, subjects’ recall reflected the bal-
ance of stimulus cues. That is, subjects recalled
benevolent cues most frequently when the bal-
ance of cues was weighted in that direction,
F (2,148) = 169.56, p<.001, and they re-
called hostile cues most frequently when the bal-
ance of cues was weighted toward hostile cues,
F (2,148) = 164.28, p < .001. No other effects
were found for the valenced recall variables.

The fourth recall variable was the fre-
quency of intrusions, or the number of times a
subject “recalled” or “made up” a statement
that had not been presented. The ANOVA of
this variable revealed a main effect of subject
status, F(1,74) = 6.56, p < .02, and main ef-
fect of grade level, F(2,74) = 4.44, p< .02.
Both the aggressive group (M = .14) and the
youngest group (M =.16) responded with
more intrusions than did the nonaggressive
group (M = .06) and the oldest group (M =
-06), respectively. In fact, the oldest aggres-
sive group (M = .07) responded with almost
as many intrusions as did the youngest nonag-
gressive group (M = .10). Therefore, the ten-
dency of aggressive boys to make intrusions
into their free recall may be viewed as a devel-
opmental deficit of several years. This deficit is
specific to intrusions, and is not evidenced in
the total recall of aggressive boys. The valence
of subjects’ intrusions was analyzed next,
through ANOVA of the frequencies of benev-
olent, neutral, and hostile statements made up
by subjects. These analyses revealed that ag-
gressive subjects made up more statements of
each valence than did the nonaggressive sub-

Dodge and Frame 627

jects, and that the proportions of intrusions of
each valence were similar for the two groups.

Recognition.—-Responses to the four rec-
ognition questions for each stimulus interview
were scored as 1 if the subject responded yes,
he had heard the statement, and 0 if he re-
sponded no, he had not heard the statement.
Because the four questions constituted a 2 (ac-
tually occurred vs. not occurred) x 2 (benev-
olent vs. hostile valence of statement) array, the
responses were analyzed in a single ANOVA,
in which subject status (aggressive vs. nonag-
gressive) and grade level (K-1, 2-3, or 4-5)
were between-subjects factors and label of actor
(popular, aggressive, or no information), bal-
ance of stimulus cues (benevolent, neutral, or
hostile), actual occurrence of the statement
(occurred vs. not occurred), and valence of the
statement (benevolent vs. hostile) were within-
subject factors.

The analysis revealed that subjects im-
proved in their recognition accuracy as they got
older, F (2,74) of the interaction between grade
level and actual occurrence of the statement
= 27.77, p<.001. That is, as subjects in-
creased in grade level, they made fewer failures
to recognize statements that had occurred and
fewer false recognitions of statements that had
not actually occurred.

The analysis also revealed that aggressive
subjects made more “false positive” errors
in recognition than did nonaggressive subjects,
F (1,74) of the interaction between subject sta-
tus and actual occurrence of the statement =
5.23, p <.03. As shown in table 2, in an aver-
age of 13.7% of the cases the aggressive group
responded that a statement had occurred when
it actually had not occurred, compared to 6.6%
for the nonageressive group. A Newman-Keuls

TABLE 2

Errors IN RECOGNITION MEMORY AMONG
AGGRESSIVE AND NONAGGRESSIVE Boys

 

 

TYPE oF ERRoR*®
Tyre oF CUE _——_—.
AND False

 

False
SupyEct STATUS Positives Negatives
Benevolent cue:
Aggressive subjects..... 14.4 20.4
Nonaggressive subjects. . 8.6 19.9
Hostile cue:
Aggressive subjects ..... 12.9 23.4
Nonaggressive subjects. . 4.5 21.1

 

4 Scores represent the mean percent of test items resulting in
errors for each group.

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
628 Child Development

analysis of this difference revealed that it is
statistically significant, p < .05. The aggressive
group did not differ from the nonaggressive
group in errors of failing to recognize a state-
ment that actually had occurred. Also, the
“false positive” errors by the aggressive group
were just as likely to occur for benevolent cues
as for hostile cues. In other words, the aggres-
sive group demonstrated a relative deficit in
recognition accuracy, and this deficit was a spe-
cific function of their collective tendency to re-
spond that a statement had occurred when it
actually had not occurred.

The data in table 2 also show that the ag-
gressive group was not biased toward recog-
nizing hostile statements over benevolent state-
ments, contrary to hypotheses. This hypothesis
was tested statistically as the interaction of sub-
ject status, actual occurrence of the statement,
and valence of the statement, and was found
to be nonsignificant.

Attributions about the actor—Each sub-
ject’s responses to the attributional questions
about the actor were scored as 1 if he said yes,
the actor would display the behavior in ques-
tion, and 0 if he said no, the actor would not
display the behavior. Two ANOVAs were per-
formed on these data, one for hostile behaviors
and one for benevolent behaviors. Subject sta-
tus (aggressive vs. nonaggressive) and grade
level (K-1, 2-3, 4-5) were between-subjects
factors and label of actor (popular, aggressive,
or no information), balance of stimulus cues
(benevolent, neutral, or hostile), and locus of
the hypothetical outcome in question (self-di-
rected vs. other-directed) were within-subject
factors in these analyses.

For the hostile behaviors, the results were
similar to those of Study 1, That is, a significant
interaction of subject status with locus of the
hostile outcome was found, F(1,74) = 3.79,
p = .05. When the outcome was directed at the
subject, aggressive subjects (M = .43) were
more likely to say that the actor would commit
a hostile behavior than were nonaggressive sub-
jects (M = .83). When the hostile outcome
was directed at a second peer, aggressive sub-
jects (M = .33) and nonaggressive subjects
(M = .39) did not differ. When the behavior
in question was a benevolent act, subject status
did not have an effect on subjects’ attributions.
Apparently, the attributional bias in aggressive
boys is restricted to the commission of hostile
acts. The data of the present study extend the
attributional bias finding among aggressive boys
to their predictions about peers’ future behavior.

For both hostile and benevolent acts main
effects of label of the actor were found, F(2,148)
= 61.75, p < .001, for hostile acts, and F(2,145)
= 58.97, p <.001, for benevolent acts. When
the actor was labeled as an aggressive boy
(M = .59) subjects were more likely to say that
he would commit a hostile act than when the
actor was not given a label (M = .35) or when
the actor was labeled as a popular child (M =
.20). Likewise, when the actor was an ageres-
sive child (M = 42) subjects were less likely
to say that the actor would commit a benevolent
act than when the actor was not given a label
(M = .65) or when the actor was a popular
child (M = .78).

The balance of stimulus cues heard also
had an effect on subjects’ attributional predic-
tions, for both hostile acts, F(2,148) = 8.57,
p< .001, and benevolent acts, F(2,148) =
9.87, p <.001. When most of the cues were
hostile (M = .42) subjects were more likely to
say that the actor would commit a hostile act
in the future than when most of the cues were
benevolent (M = .81). Likewise, when most
cues were benevolent (M = .60), subjects more
frequently said the actor would commit a be-
nevolent act than when most cues were hostile
(M = .68). An interaction of balance of stim-
ulus cues with grade level of subject for benev-
olent acts, F (4,148) = 4.36, p <.003, indi-
cated that older subjects used balance of cue
information to a greater extent than did youn-
ger subjects. No other effects were found.

Prediction of attributions from subjects’ re-
call_—In order to assess the role of subjects’ re-
call of benevolent and hostile cues in their later
attributions about the actor of the cues, several
hierarchical multiple regression analyses were
performed. In each analysis, subject status,
grade level, label of actor, and balance of stim-
ulus cues were added to the prediction equation
first, followed by the frequencies of hostile and
benevolent statements recalled by the subject.
The comparison of the multiple r’s of these two
equations constituted a test of the additive role
of recall in predicting attributions. Two crite-
rion variables were used in these analyses. A
hostility attribution score was derived by com-
bining (through subtraction) the subject’s at-
tribution about a hostile act with his attribution
about a benevolent act. One hostility attribution
score was calculated for the outcome directed
at the subject, and a second score was calcu-
lated for outcomes directed at a second peer.

The findings of these analyses are dis-
played in table 3. Consistent with previous

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Dodge and Frame 629

TABLE 3

PREDICTION OF SUBJECTS’ ATTRIBUTIONS FROM SUBJECTS’ RECALL oF Strmutus Cues

 

 

CRITERION VARIABLE

 

Hostility to Self

Hostility to Other

 

 

Signifi- Signifi-
PREDICTOR cance cance
VARIABLE F level Direction F level Direction
Subject status... 6.06 .014 (Aggressive > nonaggressive) 91 N.S. ee
Grade level... .. 6.13 .014 (Old > young) 36.62 001 (Old > young)
Label of actor... 96.39 001 (Aggressive > popular) 111.90 001 (Aggressive > popular)
Balanceofcues.. 8.34 004 (Hostile > benevolent) 8.38 004 (Hostile > benevolent)
Number of
hostile
statements
recalled. ..... 8.56 004 (+) 3.96 047 (4)
Number of
benevolent
statements
recalled. ..... 8.48 004 (—-) 13.63 001 (-)

 

Note.—-F values for the first four predictor variables represent the estimate for initial inclusion without consideration of other variables,
and have (1,692) degrees of freedom. F values for the last two variables represent the additive value of those variables after all other variables

have been considered and have (1,687) degrees of freedom.

ANOVAs in attributions, subject’s grade level,
label of actor, and balance of stimulus cues each
contributed significantly to the prediction of the
subject’s attributions of the actor’s probable
hostility to the subject and his hostility to a sec-
ond peer. A subject’s status contributed signif-
icantly to the prediction of his attribution of the
actor’s probable hostility toward the subject,
but not to the prediction of his attribution of
the actor’s behavior toward a second peer.

Even when these experimentally varied
predictor variables were partialed out, the fre-
quencies of hostile and benevolent statements
recalled by a subject contributed significantly
to the prediction of his attribution about the
actor’s probable later hostile behavior. This
finding held for both hostile behaviors to the
subject and hostile behaviors to a second peer.
In order to assess the role of recall variables in
attributions for aggressive and nonaggressive
subjects separately, these regression analyses
were repeated for each subject group separately.
Those analyses revealed that valenced recall
measures added to the prediction of attribu-
tions for each subject group, at approximately
the same levels. These Endings demonstrate the
additive role of selective recall in subjects’ at-
tributions about peers.

Discussion

The present study assessed recall and at-
tributional variables, and the relation between
the two, in aggressive and nonaggressive boys
of several ages. The analyses revealed several

rather specific cognitive deficits in recall by the
aggressive group, and a clear bias in their attri-
butions. Contrary to hypotheses, the aggressive
group did not demonstrate a greater bias to-
ward the recall of hostile over benevolent cues
than did the nonaggressive group. Still, selec-
tive recall of hostile cues was found to be a sig-
nificant predictor of a subject’s attribution that
a peer will behave in hostile ways.

The cognitive deficits found in aggressive
boys include a relative tendency to make intru-
sions into recall and a tendency to respond that
a statement had occurred previously when actu-
ally it had not. Whereas the first of these two
findings appears to represent a developmental
lag of several years among aggressive boys
(because younger subjects responded similarly),
a number of other recall findings demonstrated
no such general lag in these children. The total
recall by aggressive boys was similar to that by
nonaggressive boys. Also, the aggressive boys’
tendency to make “false positives” in recogni-
tion was not accompanied by a tendency to
make “false negatives,” as it was among younger
children. The cognitive deficit among aggressive
boys, then, is quite specific. This deficit may be
conceptually similar to the inhibition deficit
found in impulsive boys, as studied by Camp
(1977) and Kendall and Finch (1978), even
though the context of the present study differs
greatly from that of those studies. The intru-
sions into recall and the tendency to respond
yes to statements that had not been presented
to them may be viewed as a failure to inhibit

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
630 Child Development

responses by aggressive boys. How these defi-
cits might relate to aggressive behavior is a
topic that awaits further study.

The attributional biases found in the
present study are remarkably consistent with
those found in the first study, even though_the
present study assessed children’s predictions
about a peer’s future behavior rather than in-
terpretations of past behavior. All groups of
subjects were biased toward predicting that a
peer identified as an aggressive boy would be-
have aggressively in the future, relative to a
peer identified as popular. This finding is an
extension of the labeling effect found previously,
and further attests to the stigma attached to
aggressive status. The aggressive group of sub-
jects demonstrated a bias toward predicting
that a peer would behave aggressively toward
them in the future. As in the first study, this
bias did not extend to predictions about the
peer’s behavior toward a second peer. Indeed,
the attributions and predictions made by ag-
gressive boys may be called “paranoid.”

The primary goal of this study was to test
the hypothesis that the attributional bias of ag-
gressive boys occurs as a function of selective
recall of hostile stimulus cues. The data of this
study are very clear in demonstrating that
selective recall of hostile cues does contribute
to an attribution that a peer will behave aggres-
sively, even when variables such as target label
are controlled. This finding is support for a
general hypothesis that valenced predictions
occur as a function of selective recall of cues.
However, these data do not support the hypoth-
esis that the attributional bias of aggressive
boys is accounted for by a tendency to selec-
tively recall hostile cues. An additional regres-
sion analysis supports this supposition. When
valenced recall variables, along with other ex-
perimentally manipulated variables, were added
first to a prediction of attributions, a subject’s
status as aggressive or nonaggressive still con-
tributed further to the prediction of his attri-
butions, F (1,686) = 6.74, p < .01.

This finding is related to the fact that
both aggressive and nonaggressive groups of
boys demonstrated a bias toward the selective
recall of hostile cues over benevolent cues, in
spite of an attempt by the experimenters to
equate valenced cues in terms of severity of the
act. Overall, subjects recalled 43% of the hostile
cues presented, compared to 36% of the benevo-
lent cues. This finding is relevant to the descrip-
tive and observational data presented by Coie,
Dodge, and Coppotelli (in press) and Dodge,

Coie, and Brakke (Note 8). Even though chil-
dren cite peers’ aggressive behavior as the over-
whelming reason for disliking them, the actual
amount of aggressive behavior displayed by
disliked children is quite small, only 10.5% of
all of their peer-directed behaviors (compared
to 3.3% for liked children). Aggressive behavior
must be highly salient.

The data of the present studies leave us
wondering about the mechanisms involved in
attributional bias among aggressive children.
Is it possible that this attributional bias is reflec-
tive of actual past interactions? Is the bias in
the attributions of aggressive boys about their
peers related to a bias on the part of the peers
to behave aggressively toward the aggressive
boys? Certainly, the data in these studies sug-
gest that children interpret the behavior of
aggressive boys as indicative of hostility, and
that they say they would aggress against them
more willingly than against other peers. The
goal of the third study in this paper was to
examine this possibility further by observing
naturalistically the peer-directed aggressive
behavior of boys.

Study 3

This study examined children’s naturally
occurring peer-directed aggressive behavior
longitudinally, in the context of children’s initial
interactions with a group of same-age peers.
The questions to be answered by this study fol-
lowed directly from the previous findings. First,
is there a positive correlation between the fre-
quency with which a child initiates aggression
toward his peers and the frequency with which
he is the object of peers’ unprovoked aggres-
sion? Second, are the children who acquire
aggressive status, according to peer nomina-
tions, more or less likely than their nonaggres-
sive peers to be the objects of aggression?
Finally, does the relation between one’s status
as aggressive and the frequency with which one
is the object of aggression change over time as
children in a peer group get to know each other
better?

To answer these questions, six play groups
of eight boys each were formed. The boys in
each group were previously unacquainted. The
groups met for an hour each day for 8 days.
Following the eighth day, children were inter-
viewed tor the purpose of determining peer
status as aggressive and nonaggressive. Portions
of the data from this study not relevant to

aggression are presented elsewhere (Dodge,
Note 4).

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Method

Subjects Volunteers from the second-
grade classrooms at eight different schools in
a small midwestern town were recruited by a
flyer and served as the subjects of this study,
following receipt of parental permission. Eight
subjects participated in a pilot group run prior
to the administration of the study, and 48 boys
served as subjects in the actual study. Most of
the boys were of lower-middle socioeconomic
class, and 90% were white.

Administration of the play groups—The
play groups met for 1 hour a day for 8 days
over a 2-week period during the summer, Each
boy was driven to and from the play group by
a member of the research team, to ensure that
the only contact that the boys had with each
other occurred during the play group sessions.
This procedure also guaranteed the presence
of each boy during each play group hour.

An adult female group leader structured
the first 15 min of each session by engaging
the boys in a task, such as making paper air-
planes, to simulate a classroom setting. During
the remaining 45 min, children were free to
play as they wished in a large room stocked
with furniture and toys.

Coding of aggressive behavior —Three
trained observers sat behind a one-way mirror
in an adjoining room and coded the aggressive
behaviors of each child. The boys wore num-
bered T-shirts of varying colors to aid quick
identification by observers. Each coder observed
a child for a 6-min interval, took a 45-sec break,
and then moved on to a specified second child,
according to a prearranged schedule. Synchro-
nized audio cues were used to help ebservers
code behaviors in real time to the nearest 10-
sec interval. The schedule for coding was ar-
ranged so that each child was the target of
observation for at least three 6-min intervals
each hour. Even when a child was not the
target of observation, his aggressive behavior
was coded when it involved the child who was
targeted for observation.

A complex coding system was developed
for a larger investigation of children’s friend-
ships, but the codes used to assess aggressive
behaviors for the present study were quite
simple. Only unprovoked aggressive behaviors
directed at a single peer were coded. “Unpro-
voked” was defined as being not preceded by
a peer’s aggressive behavior for at least 30 sec.
Aggressive behaviors were of two types. “Ver-
bal aggression” was coded for any hostile, de-
rogatory, or exclusionary verbal behavior, and

Dodge and Frame 631

included insults, threats, and hostile name-
calling. “Physical aggression” was coded for any
clearly hostile physical contact, and included
hits, shoves, kicks, and object possession when
committed in a hostile manner. When verbal
and physical aggression occurred simulta-
neously, only physical aggression was coded.
Whenever an aggressive act involving the tar-
geted child occurred, the observer coded the
number of the initiator of the act, the type of
aggressive act (verbal or physical), and the
number of the object or recipient of the act.
In all analyses, acts that were classified as “pro-
voked” were deleted. Also, acts that were coded
simultaneously by two observers were only
counted once.

The observers received training over a 4-
week period, using videotaped interactions
collected on the playground. This training cul-
minated in the observation of boys during an
eight-session pilot group, during which ob-
servers reached an average intercoder agree-
ment of 77%, calculated as the number of agree-
ments in coding divided by the number of
agreements plus disagreements. Repeated as-
sessments of intercoder agreement were made
during actual play group sessions by having
overlapped coder schedules on a variable inter-
val basis. One fourth of all of a coder’s observa-
tions were checked by a second coder, and
coders did not know which observation periods
were being checked. This procedure resulted
in the maintenance of acceptable (75%)
agreement.

Determination of subject status——At the
conclusion of the eighth play group session,
each boy was interviewed privately by a male
who had not observed the group sessions, in
order to determine children’s status as aggres-
sive, average, or nonaggressive. In the inter-
view, each boy was shown photographs of the
seven peers in his group and was asked to name
the peer who most frequently started fights and
hit other boys. The boy was then asked to
nominate a second peer, and so on, as in a rank
ordering of the seven peers. At the conclusion
of the interview, each boy was thanked and
assured of the confidentiality of his responses.

Mean rank order scores were determined
for each boy by summing the rank-order score
received from each peer and dividing by 7.
The 12 boys whose mean scores were lowest
were designated as the aggressive group. This
group had an average peer aggression score of
2.30, with a range of 1.29-3.07. The 12 boys
whose scores were highest were designated as

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
632 Child Development

the nonaggressive group. This group had an
average score of 5.25, with a range of 4.86—-
6.43. The remaining 24 boys (mean score =
4.22.) were designated as the average group.

Results

The frequencies with which each boy
committed verbal aggression (CVA), received
verbal aggression (RVA), committed physical
aggression (CPA), and received physical ag-
gression (RPA) were calculated for each boy
summed over the eight sessions. The within-cell
correlations (controlling for play group mem-
bership) for each pair of variables were com-
puted. As expected, CVA and CPA were pos-
itively correlated, r(41) = .56, p < .01, as were
RVA and RPA, 7(41) = .36, p < .01. Interest-
ingly, CVA and RVA were also positively cor-
related, r(41) = 41, p <.01. Because of the
low frequencies of physical aggression, CPA
and RPA were not significantly correlated,
r(41) = .08.

The frequencies of aggression were also
subject to a single repeated measure un-
weighted analysis of variance (ANOVA), in
which subject status (aggressive, average, or
nonaggressive) was a between-subjects factor
and session number (1-8), initiator of the ag-
gressive act (subject vs. a peer), and type of
aggression (verbal vs. physical) were within-
subject factors. Only the linear trend of the
sessions factor (main effect and interactions)
was assessed. The group mean scores for these
analyses are displayed in table 4. As shown in
that table, a main effect of subject status,
F (2,45) = 6.98, p<.0l, indicated that the
aggressive status group initiated and received
more acts of aggression (both verbal and
physical) than the average status group, which

TABLE 4

AGGRESSIVE AcTs INITIATED AND RECEIVED
By Eaca Status Group

 

 

Subject Status and Initiated Received Percent

 

Type of Act Acts Acts Difference

Aggressive:

Verbal aggression.... 28.3 19.2 +48%

Physical aggression... 4.3 3.6 +19%
Average:

Verbal aggression.... 17.7 18.3 4%

Physical aggression... 1.9 2.1 —10%
Nonaggressive:

Verbal aggression.... 7.5 9.1 —18%

Physical aggression... 1.7 2.7 —37%,

 

Note,—Scores for initiated and received acts represent group
mean frequencies summed over eight sessions. The percent difference
is calculated as initiated acts/received acts.

in tum initiated and received more acts of
aggression than the nonaggressive status group.
In fact, the aggressive group initiated 3.8 times
as many verbal aggressive acts as the non-
aggressive group, and received 2 times as many
verbal aggressive acts. The aggressive group
initiated 2.5 times as many physical aggressive
acts as the nonaggressive group, and received
1.3 times as many physical aggressive acts. Be-
cause the magnitudes of the status group differ-
ences were greater for verbal aggression than
physical aggression, a significant interaction
between subject status and type of aggression
was found, F (2,45) = 8.57, p < .001.

An interesting interaction between subject
status and initiator of the aggressive act also
was found, F (2,34) = 2.95, p < .06. This in-
teraction is most clearly understood in terms of
the difference scores listed in table 4. Whereas
the aggressive status group initiated 43% more
aggression than it received, the nonaggressive
status group received 28% more aggression than
it initiated.

A main effect of the linear trend of the
session factor, F(1,315) = 10.62, p < .001, indi-
cated that subjects were involved in more acts
of aggression as time went on and as they got
to know each other. This factor did not inter-
act with any other factor, however. In fact,
inspection of the group means for each session
indicated that the general patterns described
above were found in each session, beginning
with the very first hour of interaction among
children. Finally, a main effect of type of ag-
gression, F(1,45) = 100.79, p < .001, indicated
the obvious fact that verbal aggression occurred
more frequently than did physical aggression.

Discussion

Four important findings emerged from this
observational study of boys’ aggressive behavior.
First, the frequency with which a boy initi-
ated acts of verbal and physical aggression was
found to be highly positively correlated to the
frequency with which peers initiated acts of
aggression toward him. That is, boys who initi-
ate acts of aggression are likely to be the objects
of peers’ acts of aggression. The present study
assessed unprovoked acts only, that is, acts
which were not immediately preceded by a
peer’s aggressive act. It is possible that the boys
who initiated many acts of aggression did pro-
voke the many aggressive acts that they
received from peers, either in subtle forms im-
mediately prior to the acts or in a long term
sense by their own high rate of aggression.
Further observational studies are necessary to

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
examine the role of provocation in boys’
aggression.

The second and third findings were that
peer-nominated aggressive status boys initiated
and received more aggressive acts than did
other boys. The former finding is further valida-
tion of the peer nomination process of selecting
aggressive boys. The latter finding suggests that
the biased attributions of aggressive status boys
may have a basis in their experience. Their
collective expectancy that peers will be biased
in aggressing toward them is consistent with
their experience.

The fourth finding is the imbalance of
the give-and-take of aggression among these
groups. The rate of aggression initiated by the
aggressive status group is out of proportion to
the rate at which they are the objects of aggres-
sion. That is, they initiate many more aggres-
sive acts than they receive. They are instigators
of aggression more than they are victims.

General Discussion

The data of these three studies have ex-
plored the relation between social cognitive
iases and deficits and boys’ aggressive be-
havior. Consistent with the findings of Dodge
(1980), the data presented here demonstrate
that, following an ambiguous provocation by a
peer, aggressive boys are more likely than non-
aggressive boys to attribute the provocation to
the hostile, rather than accidental, behavior of
the peer. This phenomenon constitutes an attri-
butional bias on the part of aggressive boys,
although it may also be argued that it is the
nonaggressive boys who are biased against attri-
butions of hostility, since bias is defined rela-
tively. Attributional bias in aggressive boys has
been found to occur only in situations in which
a provocation is directed toward the subject,
that is, aggressive boys demonstrate no such
bias when they act as observers of a provoca-
tion directed by one peer toward a second peer.
This finding is important both because it sug-
gests that the attributions by aggressive boys
are paranoid and because it fails to substantiate
alternate hypotheses that the attributions by
aggressive boys lack discrimination or are cog-
nitively immature. If either of these hypotheses
were true, aggressive boys would have re-
sponded similarly both when they were par-
ticipants and when they were observers in a
provocation. Instead, the attributions by aggres-
sive boys point toward a specific bias that peers
are hostile toward them.

Dodge and Frame 633

As in the Dodge (1980) study, the attri-
butions that boys made about a peer’s inten-
tion directly mediated the behavioral responses
that they generated. When boys attributed a
provocation by a peer to an accident they re-
frained from retaliatory aggression, whereas
when they made an attribution that the peer
was hostile, they retaliated aggressively. It was
found that the behavioral differences in retal-
iatory aggression between aggressive and non-
aggressive boys were completely accounted for
by the differences in attributions between these
groups. These findings support the hypothesis
that the overly aggressive behavior of aggres-
sive boys occurs as a function of systematic
biases in the attributions that they make about
peers’ intentions.

In addition to biases by aggressive boys,
biases were found in the attributions about ag-
gressive boys by peers. Peers said that they
would be more likely to act aggressively toward
aggressive boys than toward nonaggressive
boys. This difference occurred directly as a
function of the tendency by peers to attribute
hostile intentions to aggressive boys more fre-
quently than they did to nonaggressive boys.
Further, after viewing aggressive and non-
aggressive boys on a television monitor, peers
recalled fewer of the benevolent cues and more
of the hostile cues displayed by aggressive boys
than by nonaggressive boys. Since this biased
recall was systematically related to biased attri-
butions and predictions made about the be-
havior of aggressive boys, which in turn were
related to aggressive behavior toward those
boys, it may be concluded that biased recall of
stimulus cues is one mechanism by which a
pattern of aggression toward children suffering
from a reputation as aggressive is perpetuated.

Also reported here were observational data
on boys’ peer interactive behavior. Boys who
were viewed by their peers as highly aggressive
displayed disproportionately high rates of ag-
gressive behavior, but they were also the targets
of disproportionately high rates of aggression
by peers. These observational data are con-
sistent with the pattern of peer aggression sug-
gested by the reported experimental studies,
and point toward a vicious circle, or escalating
spiral, model of peer-directed aggression among
boys.

According to this model, aggressive boys
carry in their memories information that the
relative likelihood of being the target of hostile
aggression by peers is quite high. In an ambig-
uous provocation situation, this likelihood esti-

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
634 Child Development

mate interacts with the perception of provoca-
tion cues by these boys to lead them to attribute
the provocation to the intentional and hostile
behavior of peers. This attribution of hostility
leads them io retaliate aggressively toward
peers. Peers also carry in their memories infor-
mation about past events that leads them to
expect aggression from aggressive boys. This
information leads them to be biased toward the
recall of hostile cues displayed by aggressive
boys, which in turn leads them to attribute hos-
tility to these boys and to make predictions that
these boys will continue to aggress in the
future. Such attributions lead peers to aggress
against these aggressive boys. This behavior,
in turn, is information that serves to raise further
the likelihood estimate by aggressive boys that
peers will be hostile. The cycle starts over at
the time of the next ambiguous provocation.
Somewhere along the line, however, the recip-
rocal quality of the give-and-take of aggression
involving aggressive boys becomes distorted,
since the observational data showed that these
boys display far more aggression than they
receive,

The proposed model describes the perpet-
uation and escalation of patterns of aggression
among boys. The present investigation at-
tempted to discover a cognitive mechanism by
which the process might begin, namely the
biased recall of stimulus cues by aggressive
boys. The data presented here, however, sug-
gest that biased recall is not a mechanism whic
distinguishes aggressive from nonaggressive
boys, for both groups displayed equally biased
recall, The question of the origin of the pattern
of aggression remains unanswered.

A recent popular hypothesis is that aggres-
sive boys are deficient in social role-taking
skills (Chandler 1973; Selman 1976). A corol-
lary of this hypothesis is that aggressive boys
make errors in their attributions about the be-
havior and intentions of peers. The present data
suggest that the errors that aggressive boys
make may be systematically biased in the direc-
tion of presumed hostility. Of course, a general
social role-taking deficit may or may not also
be present. Studies of role taking in aggressive
boys must take into account the presence of
an attributional bias toward hostility, by assess-
ing role taking in both benevolent and hostile
situations. The data of these studies also sug-
gest that the attributions by aggressive boys in
situations in which they are a participant differ
from their attributions in situations in which
they are an observer. Studies of role taking
must also be aware of this distinction.

In the search for the origins of the biased
attributional pattern in aggressive boys, the
present investigation revealed a specific cog-
nitive deficit among aggressive boys. This defi-
cit is a tendency to make intrusions into recall,
both during free recall and during recognition.
During free recall, aggressive boys responded
with statements that had not been presented
to them, During a recognition task, these boys
responded with a disproportionately high rate
of false positive errors. This deficit was also
found in young children, suggesting a devel-
opmental lag of several years among aggres-
sive boys. The nature of the cognitive mech-
anism that is lagging is not clear, however, it
is reasonable to hypothesize that aggressive
boys fail to inhibit highly available responses.
This hypothesis may be conceptually similar to
the inhibition deficit found among aggressive
boys as studied by Camp (1977) and Dodge
and Newman (1981). The data collected by
Dodge and Newman (1981) are particularly
relevant. In that study, aggressive boys dis-
played a hostile attributional bias only when
they responded quickly. When they responded

slowly, no bias was found among these children.

Is it possible, then, that the attributional
bias among aggressive boys occurs as a function
of a general failure to inhibit a highly available,
but incorrect, response? If an attribution of hos-
tility is indeed the most highly available re-
sponse to children during an ambiguous provo-
cation, then the children who show an inhibi-
tion deficit—aggressive boys—would be the
ones most likely to show a hostile attributional
bias. Gorenstein and Newman (1980) suggest
that inhibition deficits are most likely to occur
during arousal. Perhaps children ‘are more
aroused when they are participants in a situa-
tion than when they are observers of a situation.
If so, aggressive boys would be more likely to
demonstrate attributional bias when they are
the targets of a provocation than when they
are observers of a provocation. The present data
are consistent with this notion. These hypoth-
eses rest on the assumption that a hostile at-
tribution is highly available as a response to
children. Given that the present investigation
found that hostile cues are highly available for
recall among children, this assumption is not
unreasonable. The serendipitous finding of an
inhibition deficit among aggressive boys, then,
may prove to be a link to understanding attribu-
tional bias. This link is only speculation at this
point, however.

One means of testing the possible relation
between inhibition deficits and attributional

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
bias is to manipulate experimentally children’s
inhibition of responses. If aggressive boys are
forced to inhibit an attributional response for
a period of time, will nonhostile attributional
responses became more available to them? Will
they then respond with nonhostile attributions?
Such experimental inquiry appears to be a fruit-
ful means of exploring the relation between
attributional biases and cognitive deficits among
aggressive children. This experimental inquiry
may also yield clinically useful information, if
the cyclical pattern between attributional bias
and aggressive behavior can be interrupted by
training children to inhibit highly available but
inappropriate cognitive responses.

Reference Notes

1. Dodge, K. A. The role of social cognition in
the development of aggressive behavior in
children. Doctoral dissertation, Duke Univer-
sity, 1978.

2. Dodge, K. A., & Coie, J. D. Behavioral pat-
terns among socially rejected, average, and
popular fifth graders. Paper presented to the
Fifth Biennial Conference on Human Devel-
opment, Atlanta, 1978.

3. Dodge, K. A.; Coie, J. D.; & Brakke, N. P.
Aggressive and prosocial behavior among pop-
ular, average, isolated, and rejected elemen-
tary school children. Unpublished paper, Indi-
ana University, 1981.

4. Dodge, K. A. Behavioral antecedents of peer
social rejection and isolation. Presented as part
of a symposium on Methodological and Sub-
stantive Issues in the Observation of Peer In-
teraction, at the biennial meeting of the So-
ciety for Research in Child Development, Bos-
ton, 1981.

References

Berkowitz, L. Situational and personal conditions
governing reactions to aggressive cues. In
D. Magnussen & N. §. Endler (Eds.), Per-
sonality at the crossroads: current issues in in-
teractional psychology. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erl-
baum, 1977,

Berndt, T. J. The effect of reciprocity in norms on
moral judgments and causal attribution. Child
Development, 1977, 48, 1322-1330,

Camp, B. Verbal mediation in young aggressive
boys. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1977,
86, 145-153.

Chandler, M. J. Egocentrism and antisocial behav-
ior: the assessment and training of social per-

635

spective-taking skills. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 1973, 9, 326-337.

Coie, J. D.; Dodge, K. A.; & Coppotelli, H. Di-
mensions and types of social status: a cross-
age perspective. Developmental Psychology,
in press,

Darley, J. M.; Klossen, E. C.; & Zanna, M. P. In-
tentions and their contexts in the moral judg-
ments of children and adults. Child Develop-
ment, 1978, 49, 66-74.

Dodge, K. A. Social cognition and children’s ag-
gressive behavior. Child Development, 1980,
51, 162-170.

Dodge, K. A., & Newman, J. P. Biased decision
making processes in aggressive boys. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 1981, 90, 375-379.

Feshbach, S. Aggression. In P. Mussen (Ed.),
Carmichael’s manual of child psychology. New
York: Wiley, 1970.

Feshbach, N., & Feshbach, S$. The relationship be-
tween empathy and aggression in two age
groups. Developmental Psychology, 1969, 1,
102-107.

Gorenstein, E. E., & Newman, J. P. Disinhibitory
psychopathology: a new prespective and a
model for research. Psychological Review,
1980, 87, 301-315.

Hartup, W. W. Aggression in childhood: develop-
mental perspectives. American Psychologist,
1974, 29, 336-341.

Kendall, P. C., & Finch, A. J. A cognitive-behav-
ioral treatment for impulsivity: a group com-
parison study. Journal of Consulting and Clin-
ical Psychology, 1978, 46, 110-118.

Mallick, S. K., & McCandless, B. R. A study of
catharsis of aggression, Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 1966, 4, 591-596.

Nasby, W.; Hayden, B.; & dePaulo, B. M. Attri-
butional bias among aggressive boys to inter-
pret unambiguous social stimuli as display of
hostility. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
1980, 89, 459-468.

Piaget, J. The moral judgment of the child. New
York: Free Press, 1965.

Rule, B. G.; Nesdale, A. R.; & McAra, M. H. Chil-
dren’s reactions to information about the in-
tentions underlying an aggressive act. Child
Development, 1974, 45, 794-798.

Selman, R. L. Toward a structural analysis of de-
veloping interpersonal relations concepts: re-
search with normal and disturbed preadoles-
cent boys. In A. D. Pick (Ed.), Minnesota
symposium on child psychology. Vol. 10. Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1976.

Zadney, J., & Gerard, H. B. Attributed intentions
and informational selectivity. Journal of Ex-
perimental Social Psychology, 1974, 10, 34-52.

Dodge and Frame

This content downloaded from
132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 13:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
