Education and Social Desirability
Bias: The Case of a Black
Presidential Candidate*

Jennifer A. Heerwig, New York University
Brian J. McCabe, New York University

Objective. Survey research consistently reports a positive association between ed-
ucational attainment and socially tolerant attitudes, but critics hold that respon-
dents with high levels of education may simply purport to hold attitudes seen as
socially desirable. In this article, we seek to adjudicate between the claim that the
association between education and social tolerance is simply an artifact of sophis-
ticated social desirability reporting on the part of well-educated respondents and the
competing theory that education has a real impact on increasing forms of social
tolerance. Methods. Using support for a black presidential candidate as our mea-
sure of social tolerance, we utilize an innovative online list experiment to test
whether high levels of support are inflated because of social desirability reporting
among the educational elite. Results. We find no evidence of systematic overre-
porting of support for a black presidential candidate among respondents with high
levels of education, and note that social desirability bias declines as educational
attainment increases. Conclusions. This research bolsters arguments about the lib-
eralizing effect of education on socially tolerant attitudes, and challenges evidence
that attributes this relationship to high levels of social desirability bias.

Survey research consistently reports a positive association between edu-
cational attainment and socially tolerant attitudes, but critics argue that this
association may be the result of high levels of social desirability reporting
among the educational elite, rather than a true measure of social tolerance.
One commonly measured estimate of social tolerance is support for a black
presidential candidate, an item included in the General Social Survey (GSS)
since the early 1970s. The GSS reports that support for a black presidential
candidate has grown from 75 percent in 1972 to 92 percent in 1996—the
year the question was terminated. As Figure 1 illustrates, support has been

*Direct correspondence to Jennifer A. Heerwig, 295 Lafayette St. 4th Fl., New York, NY
10012 (jah321@nyu.edu). Author names are listed in alphabetical order; both contributed
equally to the article. Jennifer Heerwig and Brian McCabe will make available all data and
coding information to those wishing to replicate the study. The experimental data used in
this article were collected by Time-Sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences, NSF Grant
0094964, Diana C. Mutz and Arthur Lupia, Principal Investigators (Mutz and Lupia, 2003).
The authors thank Vivek Chibber, Dalton Conley, Amy LeClair, and Jeff Manza for their
thoughtful comments.

SOCIAL SCIENCE QUARTERLY, Volume 90, Number 3, September 2009
© 2009 by the Southwestern Social Science Association

 

 

8
3
g
5
8
z
i
&
Education and Social Desirability Bias 675

 

 

FIGURE 1
Support for a Black Presidential Candidate by Level of Education
100
90
80

 

 

Percent Expressing Support

 

|/

1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996

 

 

 

—— Less than High School —— High School ---- Some College College or More

Note: Data for 1976, 1980, 1984, and 1992 are unavailable in the General Social
Survey. Estimates of support for a black presidential candidate for these years
were obtained by averaging estimates for the surrounding years (e.g., the estimate
for 1992 is the average of the GSS estimates for 1991 and 1993).

trending upward over the time period for all groups, but this support varies
by educational attainment, with well-educated respondents consistently ex-
pressing higher levels of support for a black presidential candidate than
respondents with lower levels of education. In 1996, nearly 98 percent of
respondents with a bachelor’s degree or more expressed support, compared
with only 85 percent of respondents with less than a high school diploma.
Through an online list experiment, an innovative technique used to un-
obtrusively measure support for a selected research statement, the current
article tests whether the observed disparities in support by education cat-
egory result from social desirability reporting, or whether they illustrate true
differences.

The trends observed in the GSS are consistent with an expansive literature
on the positive relationship between education and social, political, and
racial tolerance. Stouffer (1955) pioneered this effort in an early study,
which found a positive association between education and tolerance for
atheists, socialists, and communists. Later work often countenanced
Stouffer’s original finding. Greeley and Sheatsley (1971) found that edu-

 

8
s
g
5
8
z
i
&

    

 

z
a
g
g
&
%
676 Social Science Quarterly

cation significantly increased support for racial equality, while Smith (1981)
showed that higher levels of educational attainment increased tolerance for
school desegregation. Using measures of racial tolerance from the GSS,
Case, Greeley, and Fuchs (1989) provide evidence of a strong, positive effect
of education on racially egalitarian attitudes, arguing that the diverse, cos-
mopolitan experiences of the well educated contribute toward their funda-
mental support for equal rights. Similarly, Bobo and Licari’s (1989) study
on the impact of education on tolerance for nonconformist social groups
reinforced the positive correlation between education and social tolerance
originally documented by Stouffer (1955). More recently, Wagner and Zick
(1995) extend the findings beyond the U.S. context, showing an inverse
relationship between education and racial prejudice in France, Britain, West
Germany, and the Netherlands. Collectively, these studies reinforce the
canonical view of education as a key mechanism for instilling core dem-
ocratic beliefs and values, including social, political, and racial tolerance.

Yet, the link between education and tolerance has not gone unchallenged.
Most notably, research by Jackman (1978) and Jackman and Muha (1984)
contends that the effect of education may be limited to abstract principles of
racial tolerance, rather than applied measures or policy decisions. Jackman
(1978) proposes a disjuncture between professed beliefs in abstract prin-
ciples of racial equality and support for actual policies to enact racial equal-
ity. Increased levels of education generate greater familiarity with the
democratic principles of equality and tolerance, but do little by way of
increasing support for actual policies designed to achieve this equality. Thus,
Jackman argues, “the well educated are more likely to recognize those
principles, to know the ‘right’ answers, and to believe sincerely in those
answers. Such learning, however, is not very deeply embedded. In an applied
situation, those principles are no more likely to influence the orientation of
the well educated than of the poorly educated” (1978:322-23). As a result,
the consistently reported positive association between attitudes of racial
tolerance and education may be spurious, rather than substantive.

As the quote by Jackman (1978) suggests, the observed association be-
tween education and social tolerance may be inflated by social desirability
bias. Social desirability bias occurs when individuals provide answers they
believe to be more socially desirable, rather than revealing their true atti-
tudes, preferences, or beliefs. Research demonstrates that this tendency to
overreport socially desirable behaviors varies by educational attainment, with
better-educated respondents more likely to report socially desirable behaviors
that diverge from their actual behaviors. Silver, Anderson, and Abramson
(1986) and Bernstein, Chadha, and Montjoy (2001) report that respondents
who have completed college are the most likely to overreport voter partic-
ipation. Outside of the U.S. context, Karp and Brockington (2005) similarly
find that holding a university degree is strongly associated with providing a
socially desirable response about voting. This pattern of differential mis-
reporting by education categories is consistent across research fields. Jeffery

aly eAeios 9 sauNO.A BE JO Ans.a6tan 4X LE90N'600E LEZ9-OFS TLL LOL NoP/Ios darn AceaqnaAnUoy sty HoH PapemROKT ‘E “~G00Z “LETIOPSL

om puaD pur sua) aq) 395 [ZZOT/IL/ZE] Wo Aamir AUD KayaA ‘UBL

om puao-pun-suuayjuuos depen &aBsqnauuoyrsdry) su

ae sa]on4e YO ‘95N JO sap 49} Aawaqy] BuO AapLAK Uo {SUE

asu20}] suouUaD anjeaiD alquondde aq) Aq pauuanal a,
Education and Social Desirability Bias 677

(1996) reports that men tend to increasingly underreport their body weight
as their level of education increases, holding constant other demographic
characteristics, while Hofferth (1999) finds that parents with more years of
education overreport the amount of time spent reading to their children. As
Hofferth hypothesizes, highly educated individuals might simply be more
aware of social norms, and feel greater pressure to present their behavior or
attitudes in alignment with these norms.

Given this research, we suspect that questions on other socially sensitive
topics, like racial attitudes, are also likely to produce biased estimates, and
that these biases will vary systematically by educational attainment. Several
theories account for the continuing impact of racial attitudes on political
behaviors. One theory purports that simple racism—or the unwillingness to
support black candidates on the basis of skin color alone—remains pervasive
in U.S. politics (Sigelman and Welch, 1984; Terkildsen, 1993) giving rise,
in part, to the observed discrepancy between preelection public opinion
polls and Election Day results. Another tradition suggests that racial prej-
udice operates more subtly in generating political behaviors (Krysan, 2000)
as voters use preexisting assumptions about out-group members to judge
potential candidates (Sigelman et al., 1995) or make subtle inferences about
their policy positions when information is scarce (Citrin, Green, and Sears,
1990). Although both theories contend that racial attitudes inform political
beliefs, neither theorizes about the role of education in mitigating—or ex-
acerbating—these biases.

Studies intended to explicitly measure the impact of education on racial
attitudes or voting behavior in presidential elections often fail to accurately
measure the differential impact of educational attainment on social desir-
ability bias. For instance, Kuklinski, Cobb, and Gilens (1997) use a non-
intrusive technique to measure racial attitudes in the South, but their
research does not report social desirability bias—the difference between la-
tent and professed racial attitudes. They find that the well educated are ess
prejudiced than individuals with low levels of education—a measure of
latent attitudes—but their methodology precludes them from studying
which groups are the most likely to conceal their racial prejudice. Similarly,
Streb et al. (2008) compare results of their list experiment on anger toward a
female presidential candidate with publicly available polls to compute social
desirability bias. They do or find a statistically significant difference in
latent anger by educational attainment, but their reliance on publicly avail-
able polls—which lack information on respondents’ educational attain-
ment—prohibits them from assessing social desirability reporting for
particular educational categories.

Two hypotheses emerge from the literature above. The first hypothesis is
that education is positively associated with socially tolerant attitudes. Taken
at face value, higher levels of education correspond with higher levels of
support for socially tolerant behaviors. A second hypothesis is that education
is positively associated with socially desirable reporting. When asked about

asu207] suouUoD ajeaiD alquondde aq) Aq pauianol ae sappne yO ‘Bsn Jo sa[n1 10} ArBiqr] aur AaT)AA Wo (SuOMpUaD-puR-suMaY~MOD Kaye KamIC_TaUN|Uay'sdr) SuOTIpUOD puR SUUDL aq) 995 “[ZZOZ/IL/ZE] Ho hamIANT RUUD Kay AA “UBURERLY BARIOg 7 SUNDA BEE IO ATISABAIC, Ke 1°LE900'6OOT LETI-OFS MAIL LO Lap/uD Aaya huey aunuay'sdny Woy papealWanog ‘f “6007 “LEZIOPS |
678 Social Science Quarterly

socially sensitive topics, like voting behavior or body weight, highly educated
respondents are the most likely to misrepresent their true beliefs, attitudes, or
practices in order to align themselves with existing social norms. Although
the first hypothesis purports that increased education is, in fact, associated.
with increasingly tolerant social attitudes, the second hypothesis suggests
that this association may be spurious because the well educated are more
likely to profess socially tolerant attitudes to which they, in fact, do not
subscribe. Using the case of a black presidential candidate, we employ a list
experiment to test these hypotheses.

Data and Methods

Pioneered by Kuklinski, Cobb, and Gilens (1997) to measure social de-
sirability bias in reporting racial attitudes in the “New South,” the list
experiment is an increasingly popular methodological tool for measuring
social desirability bias in self-reported attitudes and behaviors.’ The list
experiment compares measures of true support for a research question with
those of overt support in order to develop an estimate of social desirability
bias.” Over the last decade, researchers have utilized the list experiment to
gauge perceptions of affirmative action programs (Sniderman and Carmines,
1997), support for biological understandings of race (Brueckner, Morning,
and Nelson, 2005), attitudes toward Jewish political candidates (Kane,
Craig, and Wald, 2004), and support for a female presidential candidate
(Streb et al., 2008).

We begin by randomly assigning each of our respondents to one of three
groups. In the first group, the poll group, we ask respondents directly about
their support for the research statement to obtain measures of overt support.
We anticipate that some of these respondents will affirm their support for a
black presidential candidate because they believe that an affirmative response
is socially desirable, not because they truly support the research statement.
Thus, we use this as a measurement of overt support. To obtain an estimate
of true support, we utilize estimates from the control and treatment groups.
Respondents in the control group are shown three statements, all related to
USS. politics but unrelated to our specific research question, and asked to
indicate how many of the statements they support without revealing which

'The list experiment is not without its drawbacks. Choice of research and list statements, as
well as question wording and the particular format of the experiment instructions, can pose
substantial difficulties for interpretation. For further discussion of these validity issues in list
experiment designs, see Kuklinski, Cobb, and Gilens (1997).

*We use the terminology of true and overt support when referencing the results of the list
treatment and the poll group, respectively. Although we acknowledge complications in
claiming that our research provides rue estimates of support, we elect to maintain this
terminology throughout the article to consistently differentiate between estimates from the
experiment and the poll groups.

asu207] suouUoD ajeaiD alquondde aq) Aq pauianol ae sappne yO ‘Bsn Jo sa[n1 10} ArBiqr] aur AaT)AA Wo (SuOMpUaD-puR-suMaY~MOD Kaye KamIC_TaUN|Uay'sdr) SuOTIpUOD puR SUUDL aq) 995 “[ZZOZ/IL/ZE] Ho hamIANT RUUD Kay AA “UBURERLY BARIOg 7 SUNDA BEE IO ATISABAIC, Ke 1°LE900'6OOT LETI-OFS MAIL LO Lap/uD Aaya huey aunuay'sdny Woy papealWanog ‘f “6007 “LEZIOPS |
Education and Social Desirability Bias 679

statements they support.? This phrasing enables respondents to conceal
support for answers deemed socially undesirable. Respondents in the treat-
ment group are then shown the same three statements as the control group,
but with an additional fourth statement about support for a black presidential
candidate. Again, respondents are instructed not to indicate which state-
ments they agree with, but only how many. After determining the mean
number of agreements for each group, we then compare the mean number
of statements to which respondents in the control group agreed to the mean
number of statements to which respondents in the treatment group agreed.
Based on the assumptions of random assignment to treatment and control
groups, any difference in group means can be attributed to the experimental
“treatment’—in this case, the research question.

For example, imagine that we observe a control group mean of 2.0,
indicating that respondents in the control group agreed, on average, with
two statements. Then, imagine that researchers observe a treatment group
mean of 2.6, indicating that, on average, respondents agreed with 2.6 of the
list statements. The difference in means is then treated as the proportion of
respondents supporting the research question, and subsequently used in our
analysis as a measure of true support. By subtracting the control group mean
from the treatment group mean, we estimate that 60 percent of respondents
truly agree with the research question.

After estimating the proportion of true support, we compare this number
to the estimate of overt support from respondents in the poll group. The
inclusion of a poll group in our research design offers a significant meth-
odological improvement over previous list experiments.’ The poll group
allows us to make comparisons between overt and true support by demo-
graphic group. In previous list experiments, measures of true support were
compared with polls conducted by other research organizations to determine
levels of social desirability reporting (see, e.g., Streb et al., 2008). This
approach has the twin disadvantage of being unable to make subgroup
comparisons and relying on samples selected by other researchers and/or
research organizations. Having a unique comparison group, we then cal-
culate the difference between overt support and true support to estimate the
level of social desirability bias. Using a difference in proportions test, we test
whether the proportion of respondents affirming overt support for the re-

Previous list experiments used list statements unrelated to current affairs, but we decided
to use statements related to U.S. politics. By using statements from previous list experiments
unrelated to U.S. politics (see, e.g., Streb et al., 2008), we worried that respondents would be
more likely to identify the research statement about a black presidential candidate as referring
to a specific individual (e.g., Barack Obama). To the extent that the research statement is
misread in this context, the experiment measures support for a particular black presidential
candidate, rather than a generic one. Thus, by including the research statement among other
statements related to U.S. politics, we intended to minimize any misreading of the research
statement that would bias our results.

*Here, we follow Brueckner, Morning, and Nelson (2005) in the inclusion of a unique poll
group in the research design.

asu207] suouUoD ajeaiD alquondde aq) Aq pauianol ae sappne yO ‘Bsn Jo sa[n1 10} ArBiqr] aur AaT)AA Wo (SuOMpUaD-puR-suMaY~MOD Kaye KamIC_TaUN|Uay'sdr) SuOTIpUOD puR SUUDL aq) 995 “[ZZOZ/IL/ZE] Ho hamIANT RUUD Kay AA “UBURERLY BARIOg 7 SUNDA BEE IO ATISABAIC, Ke 1°LE900'6OOT LETI-OFS MAIL LO Lap/uD Aaya huey aunuay'sdny Woy papealWanog ‘f “6007 “LEZIOPS |
680 Social Science Quarterly

search question was significantly different from the proportion of respon-
dents affirming true support for the research question.

Our nationally representative sample of 1,560 respondents was random-
ized into three groups: the poll, control, and treatment groups. Using a chi-
square test, we first confirm that group assignment and educational category
are statistically independent. Our chi-square test statistic confirms random
assignment by educational category into our three groups (chi-square =
3.803, p = 0.703). Respondents in Group A (V= 514) were asked directly
to indicate whether or not they agree with the following statement: “I am
willing to support a black Presidential candidate.” Responses in the poll
group were treated as the equivalent of a public opinion poll to measure
overt support for a black presidential candidate.

In the control group (V = 552), respondents were presented with a series
of three statements and asked how many statements they supported. Re-
spondents were specifically instructed vor to indicate which statements they
supported, but simply to select the total number. The following three
statements were presented to respondents in the control group.

e I think Presidential campaigns are too costly.
e I am willing to support stronger immigration laws.
e I think the war in Iraq will ultimately make the US safer.

The three statements were presented in randomized order to control for
the possibility that the ordering of statements would impact responses.

Respondents in the treatment group (V = 494) were presented with four
statements. The first three were identical to those presented to the control
group, but with an additional fourth statement, our research statement.
Thus, their statements were:

I think Presidential campaigns are too costly.

I am willing to support stronger immigration laws.

I think the war in Iraq will ultimately make the US safer.
I am willing to support a black Presidential candidate

Again, the ordering of the statements was randomized to ensure that the
arrangement of statements did not bias responses.

Our list experiment was conducted in conjunction with Time-Sharing
Experiments for the Social Sciences, an NSF-funded program enabling so-
cial science researchers to collect original experimental data. In conjunction
with TESS, samples are fielded by Knowledge Networks. Knowledge Net-
works utilizes random-digit dialing (RDD) to recruit a panel of survey
participants. Households that agree to participate in the panel are provided
with WebTV if they lack Internet access to facilitate completion of the
organization’s Internet-based surveys.’ From this pool of active participants,

For more information on Knowledge Networks and TESS, visit (http://www.knowledge
networks.com) and (http://www.experimentcentral.org), or see Lawless (2004:Appx. A).

asu207] suouUoD ajeaiD alquondde aq) Aq pauianol ae sappne yO ‘Bsn Jo sa[n1 10} ArBiqr] aur AaT)AA Wo (SuOMpUaD-puR-suMaY~MOD Kaye KamIC_TaUN|Uay'sdr) SuOTIpUOD puR SUUDL aq) 995 “[ZZOZ/IL/ZE] Ho hamIANT RUUD Kay AA “UBURERLY BARIOg 7 SUNDA BEE IO ATISABAIC, Ke 1°LE900'6OOT LETI-OFS MAIL LO Lap/uD Aaya huey aunuay'sdny Woy papealWanog ‘f “6007 “LEZIOPS |
Education and Social Desirability Bias 681
TABLE 1

Distribution of Experimental Categories by Level of Education

 

 

Total Poll Group. = Control Group. ~—s Treatment Group
Less than HS 13.33% 14.59% 12.14% 13.36%
(208) (78) (67) (66)
High school 31.73% 30.35% 34.24% 30.36%
(495) (156) (189) (150)
Some college 26.47% 25.88% 25.54% 28.14%
(413) (133) (141) (139)
College or more 28.46% 29.18% 28.08% 28.14%
(444) (150) (155) (139)
100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
(1,560) (614) (652) (494)

 

Note: Number of respondents listed in parentheses.

Knowledge Networks randomly selects panel members to participate in
upcoming surveys and experiments. For our list experiment, a total of 2,184
individuals were chosen to participate. The overall response rate was 71.4
percent, ultimately yielding a sample of 1,560 participants. The survey was
fielded between June 7, 2007 and June 13, 2007.8

Table 1 provides the distribution of educational attainment within each
group of our sample. As indicated, our sample is roughly evenly divided
across the poll, control, and treatment groups. About 13 percent of our
respondents had less than a high school education, 32 percent were high
school graduates, 26 percent had attended some college, and 28 percent
received a bachelor’s degree or beyond.

By fielding an Internet-based study, we were able to create a research
setting that minimized the conditions for social desirability reporting. Pre-
vious research suggests that the presence of an experimenter/interviewer is
likely to increase social desirability reporting, as respondents feel greater
social pressures in the presence of interviewers than in their absence (Evans
et al., 2003; Richman et al., 1999). Likewise, more nuanced work on racial
attitudes reveals privacy levels impact respondents’ willingness to reveal (or
conceal) racially tolerant attitudes (Krysan, 1998:511). Increasing the pri-
vacy of the research setting through Internet-based research should decrease
socially desirable reporting. As an important caveat to our results, privacy
effects have been shown to vary by education level, with better-educated
respondents more susceptible to privacy effects. As a result, to the extent that
our methodological decisions bias our results, we anticipate a downward bias
in which our reported results may underestimate the level of social desir-

The survey was conducted nearly a year and a half before the 2008 presidential election.
Nonetheless, most major candidates—including Barack Obama—had declared. their candi-
dacy by the summer of 2007.

5
8
g
5

 

OUNOpjUOD Kaya AumaqnaRnquoy

 

    
    

g
8
3
g
5
8
z
i
&

0 Kamagra Aaya “UR

aq) 295

 
682 Social Science Quarterly
TABLE 2

Estimated Mean Level of True Support for a Black Presidential Candidate, Total
and by Educational Category

 

Control Group = Treatment Group ~—- Proportion True Support

 

Total 1.84 2.54 0.70**
(0.05) (0.06) (0.08)
Less than HS 1.82 2.26 0.44
(0.15) (0.25) (0.30)
High school 1.86 2.43 0.57 **
(0.08) (0.10) (0.13)
Some college 1.78 2.55 0.77 **
(0.11) (0.09) (0.14)
College or more 1.89 2.81 0.92 **
(0.10) (0.09) (0.14)

 

** <0.01; 40 <0.05.
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.

ability reporting when respondents are asked about a black presidential
candidate.

Results

By subtracting the mean for the control group from the treatment group
mean, we obtain the proportion of true support for a black presidential
candidate. For the sample as a whole, the mean for the treatment group is
2.54 and the mean for the control group is 1.84 (see Table 2). By sub-
tracting these estimates, we find that 70 percent of respondents would sup-
port a black presidential candidate.” We next run a difference of means test
to confirm that our results are statistically significant.

True support increases monotonically with additional years of education.
Only 44 percent of respondents who have not completed high school truly
support the research question, while nearly 57 percent of respondents with a
high school education do. The estimate increases by approximately 20
points to 77 percent for respondents with some college education. Lastly, as
expected, college graduates have the highest level of true support for a black
presidential candidate at 92 percent.

We next utilize estimates of overt support from the poll group to estimate
the magnitude of social desirability bias for the sample as a whole, as well as
by educational category. The estimate of social desirability bias is calculated

7These estimates are substantially lower than those reported for overt support in the
General Social Survey (GSS). We expect lower levels of overt support in our research design
because of the privacy effects inherent in Internet-based. research.

5
8
g
5

 

OUNOpjUOD Kaya AumaqnaRnquoy

 

    
    

g
8
3
g
5
8
z
i
&

0 Kamagra Aaya “UR

aq) 295

 
Education and Social Desirability Bias 683
TABLE 3

Estimates of Social Desirability Bias in Support for a Black Presidential Candidate,
Total and by Educational Category

 

 

Proportion Proportion Desirability
True Support Overt Support Effect
Total 0.70 0.84 0.14**
(0.08) (0.02)
Less than HS 0.44 0.74 0.30**
(0.29) (0.07)
High school 0.57 0.81 0.24**
(0.13) (0.04)
Some college 0.77 0.90 0.13**
(0.14) (0.04)
College or more 0.92 0.86 0.06
(0.13) (0.03)

 

** <0.01; 40 <0.05.
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.

by subtracting the true support estimate from the overt support estimate.
For the sample as a whole, overt support for a black presidential candidate is
84 percent, but true support is only 70 percent, which produces an esti-
mated social desirability bias of 14 points (see Table 3). Using a difference in
proportions test, we find that the difference between overt and true support
is statistically significant (o<0.01).

Lastly, we report the magnitude of social desirability bias in estimates of
support for a black presidential candidate by educational category. Respon-
dents with low levels of education are the most likely to conceal their socially
undesirable answer, while those with high levels of education are the least
likely to do so. Respondents who have not completed high school have the
lowest overt support (74 percent) and the lowest true support (44 percent),
producing a social desirability effect of approximately 30 points. The level of
social desirability bias steadily drops as years of education increases, with 24
percent of high school graduates giving a socially desirable answer and 13
percent of respondents with some college giving the socially desirable re-
sponse. For college graduates, the estimate of social desirability bias is -0.06.
The negative estimate of social desirability bias for college graduates results
from a higher proportion of true than overt support.® With the exception of

®The experiment includes a small sample of respondents with a graduate or professional
degree (NV = 127). When we exclude these respondents from our analysis and run our analysis
for respondents whose highest level of education is a college degree, we find that the overt
support is 92 percent, the true support is 84 percent, and the social desirability bias is 8
points. Thus, respondents with graduate and professional degrees are driving the negative
social desirability results indicated above.

5
8
g
5

 

OUNOpjUOD Kaya AumaqnaRnquoy

 

    
    

g
8
3
g
5
8
z
i
&

0 Kamagra Aaya “UR

aq) 295

 
684 Social Science Quarterly

the highest education category, the desirability effect for each educational
category is significantly different from zero at the 0.01 level.

Conclusion

This article simultaneously tests two hypotheses about the association
between education and social desirability bias in estimated support for a
black presidential candidate. The first hypothesis proposes that education
increases socially tolerant attitudes, a proposition consistent with the po-
sition that education alters individuals’ beliefs and attitudes toward non-
conformist, nontraditional, or out-group individuals. The second hypothesis
proposes that this positive correlation is, in fact, superficial. Rather than a
truly liberalizing effect, it attributes the perceived increases in racial tolerance
to the propensity of well-educated respondents to conceal their undesirable
attitudes. In this scenario, education teaches individuals the dominant social
norms, and applies social pressures for conformity. Testing support for a
black presidential candidate through an online experiment, this article lends
credibility to the first hypothesis and also calls into dispute the second
hypothesis.

Given our unobtrusive estimation strategy, we believe that the measured
gap in true support between college-educated respondents and those with
less than a high school education points to a serious, authentic difference in
racial tolerance. This gap lends strong support to the first hypothesis that
education may have a liberalizing impact on measures of social tolerance,
and that this observed relationship is zor a spurious effect of social desir-
ability bias. By comparing our unobtrusive measure of support to overt
estimates of support, we can more accurately measure social desirability bias
for particular demographic groups. More pointedly, following the research
design originally employed by Brueckner, Morning, and Nelson (2005),
we are able to accurately measure social desirability bias by educational
attainment.

Our research challenges existing literature on education and social desir-
ability bias to further grapple with the circumstances—or, perhaps, the issue
areas—in which well-educated individuals tend to succumb to social de-
sirability reporting. It is possible that behaviors (e.g., voting, church atten-
dance) remain subject to social desirability reporting, but attitudes (e.g.,
support for nontraditional political candidates) do not. Alternatively, it is
possible that some attitudes are not subject to social desirability reporting
(e.g., support for a black presidential candidate) while others continue to be
(e.g., gay marriage). Given these contrary findings relative to the established
association between education and social desirability bias, we encourage a
more nuanced approach—both theoretically and empirically—to unpacking
this relationship. Further research would be wise to examine other socially
sensitive topics to confirm that our findings by educational category hold
beyond the narrow issue area addressed in this article.

asu207] suouUoD ajeaiD alquondde aq) Aq pauianol ae sappne yO ‘Bsn Jo sa[n1 10} ArBiqr] aur AaT)AA Wo (SuOMpUaD-puR-suMaY~MOD Kaye KamIC_TaUN|Uay'sdr) SuOTIpUOD puR SUUDL aq) 995 “[ZZOZ/IL/ZE] Ho hamIANT RUUD Kay AA “UBURERLY BARIOg 7 SUNDA BEE IO ATISABAIC, Ke 1°LE900'6OOT LETI-OFS MAIL LO Lap/uD Aaya huey aunuay'sdny Woy papealWanog ‘f “6007 “LEZIOPS |
Education and Social Desirability Bias 685

In the shadow of the 2008 election, the experiment conducted in this
article is also ripe for replication. Although Obama’s victory represents a
milestone in the history of U.S. politics, we do not yet know the impact of
his candidacy on racial attitudes in the United States. Did exposure to a
viable black candidate increase tolerance among the least supportive, or do
Americans who expressed anxiety about a black candidate before Obama’s
candidacy remain uncomfortable supporting a black presidential candidate
now? Immediate postelection analysis reports that pockets of voters con-
centrated in counties with lower levels of educational achievement voted
more heavily Republican in 2008 than in 2004—a finding that suggests
racial attitudes still influence voter preferences among certain subgroups
(Nossiter, 2008). Still, this postelection analysis is preliminary, and offers
only a glimpse at the impact of Obama’s candidacy on racial attitudes. A
replication of this experiment to compare before and after measures of
support would enable researchers to test the impact of Americans’ exposure
to a viable black presidential candidate on attitudes toward one.

REFERENCES

Bernstein, Robert, Anita Chadha, and Robert Montjoy. 2001. “Overreporting Voting: Why
it Happens and Why it Matters.” Public Opinion Quarterly 65:22-44.

Bobo, Lawrence, and Frederick Licari. 1989. “Education and Political Tolerance: Testing the
Effects of Cognitive Sophistication and Target Group Affect.” Public Opinion Quarterly
53:285-308.

Brueckner, Hannah, Ann Morning, and Alondra Nelson. 2005. “The Expression of Bio-
logical Concepts of Race.” Paper prepared for the Annual Meeting of the American So-
ciological Association. Philadelphia, PA.

Case, Charles E., Andrew M. Greeley, and Stephan Fuchs. 1989. “Social Determinants of
Racial Prejudice.” Sociological Perspectives 32(4):469-83.

Citrin, Jack, Donald Phillip Green, and David O. Sears. 1990. “White Reactions to Black
Candidates: When Does Race Matter?” Public Opinion Quarterly 54(1):74-96.

Evans, David C., Daniel J. Garcia, Diane M. Garcia, and Robert 5. Baron. 2003. “In the
Privacy of Their Own Homes: Using the Internet to Assess Racial Bias.” Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin 29(2):273-84.

Greeley, Andrew M., and Paul Sheatsley. 1971. “Attitudes Towards Racial Integration.”
Scientific American 225:13-19.

Hofferth, Sandra. 1999. “Family Reading to Young Children: Social Desirability and Cul-
tural Biases in Reporting.” Paper presented at Workshop on Measurement of and Research
on Time Use, Committee on National Statistics, National Research Council. Washington,
DC.

Jackman, Mary. 1978. “General and Applied Tolerance: Does Education Increase Com-
mitment to Racial Education?” American Journal of Political Science 22:302-24.

Jackman, Mary, and Michael Muha. 1984. “Education and Intergroup Attitudes: Moral
Enlightenment, Superficial Democratic Commitment, or Ideological Refinement?” American
Sociological Review 49:751-69.

 

8
3
g
5
8
z
i
&

    

 

z
a
g
g
&
%
686 Social Science Quarterly

Jeffery, Robert W. 1996. “Bias in Reported Body Weight as a Function of Education,
Occupation, Health and Weight Concern.” Addictive Behaviors 21(2):217-22.

Kane, James G., Stephen C. Craig, and Kenneth D. Wald. 2004. “Religion and Presidential
Politics in Florida: A List Experiment.” Social Science Quarterly 85(2):281-93.

Karp, Jeffrey A., and David Brockington. 2005. “Social Desirability and Response Validity:
A Comparative Analysis of Overreporting Voter Turnout in Five Countries.” Journal of
Politics 67(3):825—40.

Krysan, Maria. 1998. “Privacy and the Expression of White Racial Attitudes: A Comparison
Across Three Contexts.” Public Opinion Quarterly 62(4):506-44.

. 2000. “Prejudice, Politics and Public Opinion: Understanding the Sources of Racial
Policy Attitudes.” Annual Review of Sociology 26:135-68.

Kuklinski, James H., Michael D. Cobb, and Martin Gilens. 1997. “Racial Attitudes and the
“New South’.” Journal of Politics 59:323-49.

 

Lawless, Jennifer L. 2004. “Women, War, and Winning Elections: Gender Stereotyping in
the Post-September 11th Era.” Political Research Quarterly 57(3):479-90.

Mutz, Diana C., and Arthur Lupia, Principal Investigators. 2003. Data Collected by the Time-
Sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences. NSF Grant 0094964.

Nossiter, Adam. 2008. “For South, a Waning Hold on National Politics.” New York Times
November 11.

Richman, Wendy L., Sara Kiesler, Suzanne Weisband, and Fritz Drasgow. 1999. “A Meta-
Analytic Study of Social Desirability Distortion in Computer-Administered Questionnaires,
Traditional Questionnaires, and Interviews.” Journal of Applied Psychology 84(5):754—75.

Sigelman, Carol K., Lee Sigelman, Barbara J. Walkosz, and Michael Nitz. 1995. “Black
Candidates, White Voters: Understanding Racial Bias in Political Perceptions.” American
Journal of Political Science 39(1):243-65.

Sigelman, Lee, and Susan Welch. 1984. “Race, Gender, and Opinion Toward Black and
Female Presidential Candidates.” Public Opinion Quarterly 48(2):467-75.

Silver, Brian D., Barbara A. Anderson, and Paul A. Abramson. 1986. “Who Overreports
Voting?” American Political Science Review 80(2):613-24.

Smith, Tom W. 1981. “Racial Tolerance as a Function of Group Position.” American
Sociological Review 46:558-73.

Sniderman, Paul M., and Edward G. Carmines. 1997. Reaching Beyond Race. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Stouffer, Samuel A. 1955. Communism, Conformity and Civil Liberties. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.

Streb, Matthew J., Barbara Burrell, Brian Frederick, and Michael A. Genovese. 2008. “Social
Desirability Effects and Support for a Female American President.” Public Opinion Quarterly
72(1):76-89.

Terkildsen, Nayda. 1993. “When White Voters Evaluate Black Candidates: The Processing
Implications of Candidate Skin Color, Prejudice, and Self-Monitoring.” American Journal of
Political Science 37(4):1032-53.

Wagner, Ulrich, and Andrias Zick. 1995. “The Relation of Formal Education to Ethnic
Prejudice: It’s Reliability, Validity and Explanation.” European Journal of Social Psychology
25:41-56.

 

8
3
g
5
8
z
i
&

 

z
a
g
g
&
%
