TIM HOPE

PRETEND IT DOESN’T WORK: THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE
MARYLAND SCIENTIFIC METHODS SCALE

ABSTRACT. The social constructs and methodological principles embodied in the Mary-
land Scientific Methods Scale (SMS), comprising part of the Campbell Collaboration in
Crime and Justice assessment protocol, induce a series of biases in the evaluation of evidence
of crime prevention policy interventions that focus on collective social phenomena, such as
communities. Applying these principles leads to negative conclusions about effectiveness;
yet their inherent ‘anti-social’ bias may induce Type II error with regard to the desirability
of ‘social’ interventions to reduce crime. Policy-making is poorly served as a result. This
point is illustrated, first, through a scrutiny of the social constructs used, including those
that typify treatments, institutional settings and units of analysis. These are seen as being
constructed in a way that is congenial to the underlying methodological issue of ‘control’
but that constitute nevertheless a distorted definition of the governance issues involved in
crime reduction in community settings. A model more appropriate for evaluating volun-
taristic action in civil society is needed. Second, it is suggested that this methodological
bias arises particularly in policy interventions and change programmes that address issues
concerming the ‘collective efficacy’ of local communities in reducing crime. An empirical
exemplification of these arguments is presented with reference to a completed evaluation
research study (Foster and Hope, 1993).

KEY WORDS: evaluation methods, community crime prevention, Campbell Collaboration,
Maryland Scientific Methods Scale, random controlled trials, Type 2 error, governance,
selection bias, collective efficacy, Priority Estates Project

INTRODUCTION

A published ‘protocol’ of the Campbell Collaboration in Crime and Justice
(Campbell Collaboration 2004) states that its aim is to include the “best”
evaluations by selecting “rigorous evaluations. ..based on the Maryland
Scientific Methods Scale (SMS) (Sherman et al. 1997)” (Bennett et al.
no date). Briefly, the SMS is proposed as a method for ranking evalua-
tion research studies according to three methodological criteria: control
over other variables that might be causing an observed relationship be-
tween an intervention and its outcome; measurement error; and statistical
power to detect programme effects (see Sherman et al. 1998). In essence,
the SMS uses a number of criteria applied to a study’s research methods
that reflect the methodological precepts of the ‘experimental method’ as
developed for application in social ‘field settings’ (Cook and Campbell
1979; Welsh et al. 2002). The ranking on the SMS given to a study’s
research design reflects the level of its approximation to the paradigmatic

European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research (2005) 11: 275-296
DOT: 10.1007/s10610-005-9000- 1 © Springer 2005
276 T, HOPE

model of the ‘random controlled trial’ (RCT) experiment. Neither the de-
tails of the SMS, nor its methodological bases, are themselves the subject
of this paper. However, what is of concern here are the kind of infer-
ences drawn by its application, specifically for the purposes of making
recommendations to policy-makers about “what works” in the reduction of
crime.

The argument presented here is that the conclusion validity of *commu-
nity crime prevention’ interventions that are the result of research designs
that score highly on the SMS are likely to suffer from Type I Error — that
is, they are likely to be interpreted as inferring erroneously that treatment
effects do not exist when in fact they do (Judd and Kenny 1981); in this
case, that community crime prevention initiatives are ineffective when in-
deed they may be effective’. For the purposes of this paper, ‘community
crime prevention’ is defined as change in the institutional structure of local
communities in ways that increase the exercise of informal social control
by residents, thereby reducing the incidence of crime victimisation in the
residential environment (Hope and Karstedt 2003; Hope 1998, 1995; Foster
and Hope 1993). In essence, these are interventions that address ‘commu-
nities’ as holistic entities that encapsulate their own internal social relations
and dynamics.

The reasons for drawing erroneous conclusions from SMS-type eval-
uation research lie in two, related, ‘threats to validity’ that, according to
SMS-like methods, properly designed and conducted experiments are sup-
posed to guard against (Judd and Kenny 1981):

1. correlation between the process of selection of cases (communities) and
the intervention (treatment) applied during the ‘experiment’,
2. social processes that mediate between treatment and outcome.

An unreliable experiment will not have controlled for such biases; a
rigorous experiment will have taken steps in the research design to remove
these possibilities. To the extent to which these have been accomplished
reliably, valid inferences of effect (what works) can be drawn. In contrast,
the argument here is that these two so-called threats to validity encapsulate,
paradoxically, much of what is typical of community crime prevention in-
terventions, and much of what underlies the way they work — that is, the
social, collective ‘mechanisms’ that they activate in order to bring about

' Since drafting this paper I have come to realise that the general argument presented here
is similar to that developed by Heckman and Smith (1995) regarding the use of experimental
methods in policy evaluation (Hope 2005) which, more generally still, illustrates various
forms of selection bias that pose substantial methodological problems in the scientific
evaluation of public policy (Heckman 2001).
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 277

outcomes. Thus, even studies of community crime prevention that score
highly on the SMS still may be likely to be biased against demonstrating
“what works” in community crime prevention, as a result of the method-
ological criteria applied, rather than the presumed ineffectiveness of the
intervention. Research and reviews of community crime prevention, that
use designs favoured by the Campbell Collaboration in Crime and Justice
(i.e. the SMS), may well be biased against detecting effects when they
actually might be there, and thus seriously mislead policy-makers, induc-
ing them to reject programmes needlessly and undermining the political
investment made in them. Rather than being useful to policy-makers, the
inappropriate application of the SMS criteria of reliability and validity may
actually harm the policy-process, at least to the extent that they introduce
error into the evidentiary process that is supposed to be underpinning the
claim to ‘evidence-based’ policy-making.

COMMUNITY SETTINGS AND SMS-BASED REVIEWS

A recent review using the SMS criteria concludes that only the ‘institu-
tional setting’ of ‘communities’ did not support at least one type of pro-
gramme where there was evidence of ‘proven effectiveness’ in preventing
crime (Welsh et al. 2002, p. 21). In contrast, the institutional setting where
there was found to be the highest number of effective programmes was
‘courts/corrections’ followed by ‘schools’. The difficulty here in accept-
ing these as valid conclusions is the incommensurate definitions applied to
programmes found in different so-called ‘settings’. Interventions in ‘com-
munity’ settings (according to the review team’s criteria) accord very much
to the definition used in my own review (Hope 1995) — that is, interventions
acting to change holistically the structure and organisation of communi-
ties, with outcomes also defined in aggregate terms, such as changes in area
crime victimisation or offending rates. This is rarely so for programmes
reviewed in the other types of settings. Thus, there are no evaluations of
efforts to change the organisation or ethos of schools, or the structure of
labour markets (e.g. with the introduction of a minimum wage), that reach
the reviewers’ acceptable standard on the SMS. Rather, the interventions
reaching proven effectiveness are those that are about equipping individu-
als to operate more effectively within institutional settings by delivering to
them benefit incentives, assistance or sanctions.

There are two obvious connected reasons for this: first, there are very
different styles of governance associated with the different institutional
settings and the programmes typically implemented in them. In practice,
this shapes the ability to exercise control in order to bring about subjects’
compliance with the programme, and hence defines the nature of the inter-
278 T, HOPE

vention itself. Community interventions tend to be premised upon mecha-
nisms of collective, voluntary participation — for example, where a com-
munity group, or non-state agency acting on its behalf, is concerned with
collective self-advancement; or where a government is concerned with the
physical, economic or social ‘regeneration’ of a residential area. Here,
the ideas and stimuli for the intervention arise out of the sphere of urban
politics as it reflects the interplay between government and civil society
(Hope and Karstedt 2003). In contrast, the ‘treatment’ programmes tak-
ing place in courts and corrections, and even labour markets (according to
these reviews), are characterised by individual, constrained participation.
Typically, they are concerned with altering the rewards and/or sanctions
bearing upon individuals so that they can ‘fit-in’ to prevailing institutional
arrangements. Here, ideas about intervention arise from different spheres
— of criminal justice, education and ‘correction’ — that are, at root, the re-
sponsibility of the state — the institution with legitimate, judicial powers of
coercion over subjects.

Participation in community programmes is voluntary because these in-
volve the social and institutional arrangements of civil society. The mode
of governance in civil society is indirect and diffuse — holders of power
(government) have to govern ‘at a distance’, influencing and shaping the
setting itself, utilising a range of essentially non-coercive measures, in or-
der to engineer the compliance of private citizens, including influencing
the future behaviour of ‘putative’ as distinct from actual offenders or vic-
tims”. In contrast, settings such as courts, prisons and (only to a lesser
extent) schools, and even labour markets (particularly of the unemployed
or low waged), include subjects whose participation is largely involuntary
or over whom power-holders (essentially the state and its agencies) have
some considerable (ultimately coercive) power of control and influence.
These latter settings differ therefore from civil society communities in that
they comprise the various arenas where there is a greater level of resource
for engineering the compliance of subjects available to agencies with the
authority and legitimacy to bring about change.

The second, related, reason for the relative paucity of high SMS-type
evaluated programmes in community settings, relative to the other kinds
of setting reviewed, is thus due to the reliance of SMS research designs on
the capacity to control subjects directly — not least, the ability to allocate
subjects randomly to different experimental conditions, and (to a lesser
degree) to command the compliance of state-agencies in implementing

nee

? That is, they accord to the sphere of ‘primary crime prevention’ “identifying conditions
of the physical and social environment that provide opportunities for or precipitate criminal
acts (Brantingham and Faust 1976; p. 290).
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 279

experiments’. In this respect, it could be said that the SMS methodology
itself selects the settings in which it is to be implemented. What compe-
tent experimenter would contemplate randomisation in settings where a
priori the likelihood of creating such experimental conditions would be
slim? Indeed, Cook and Campbell’s (1979) classic book is mostly taken up
with research design and analytic methods, addressed to the commissioned
evaluator, and designed to compensate for the inability to maintain rigor-
ous experimental control. Yet many of their precepts —arguably examples of
quality (i.e. scientifically rigorous ingenuity) in research design — would be
scored at lower SMS levels than experimental designs. Thus, it is possible
that poor quality research may be over-valued and good quality research
down-played. In sum, the application of the SMS review methodology does
not tell us to what extent the differential findings between community and
other settings are due to the selective use of SMS-favoured methods rather
than the relative efficacy of the various treatments. Worse, comparatively
unfavourable inferences could be drawn simply on the basis of comparing
foolish (and thus flawed) efforts at ‘experimentation’ in community settings
with competently-designed and well-executed experiments in settings more
amenable to the manipulation and control of human subjects.

THE DIMENSIONS OF COMMUNITY INTERVENTION

The first review of crime prevention using the SMS meta-evaluation criteria
was carried out by Sherman et al. following a US Congressional mandate
(1998). Under the heading “what doesn’t work?” is listed “. . .community
mobilization of residents’ efforts against crime in high-crime, inner city
areas of concentrated poverty” (op. cit, p. 8), citing my own review of
the field (Hope 1995) as corroboration of this proposition (erroneously in
my view, see below). In his discussion, Sherman (in Sherman et al. 1997,
Chapter 3) draws attention to the distinction I have made between two
‘dimensions’ through which community influences and change strategies
might be thought to operate (Hope 1995). First, there is the horizontal
dimension of informal social relations amongst residents. Sherman is right
to conclude that the traditional American approach (reviewed extensively in
my paper) has been premised on a voluntaristic conception of community
self-help, that has proven insufficient, especially in the face of a growing
linkage between the concentration of poverty and the concentration of
crime in inner city communities — a relationship that, following Sampson

3 Of course, this is not to deny that agencies can entice people to participate in programmes
by the use of incentives, rewards or benefits, though they will still need to offer these in a
legitimate manner.
280 T, HOPE

and Wilson (1995), exemplifies the concentration effect of social exclusion
(Pitts and Hope 1997):

“", ironically, a central tenet of community prevention programs has been the empow-
erment of local community leaders to design and implement their own crime prevention
strategies. This philosophy may amount to throwing people overboard and then letting
them design their own life preserver. The scientific literature shows that the policies and
market forces causing criminogenic community structures and cultures are beyond the
control of neighbourhood residents, and that ‘empowerment’ does not include the power
to change those policies (Hope 1995)” (Sherman 1997, Chapter 3y*.

Clearly, to the extent that the preponderance of American evaluations (at
least in the studies reviewed by Sherman et al. 1997), have concentrated
on American community crime prevention efforts, they are likely to come
to these conclusions. Again, though, this conclusion may largely reflect
correlations between the ‘selection’ of cases (treatments) and the preferred
methods of evaluation. Not only was the Sherman et al. (1997) review
constrained precisely by the American political process” but both the se-
lection of treatments and the methods used for evaluation reflect conflicting
tendencies in American political culture — on the one hand, associational
voluntarism — which is correlated with the favoured type of intervention
(resident mobilisation) (Halpern 1995); on the other hand, the applica-
tion of scientific method to social reform — which is correlated with the
favoured type of evaluation method (experimentation) (see Oakley 2000)°.
American community-based efforts to reduce crime have foundered on
this conflict (Hope 2000, 1995), precisely because it is an essential conflict
within American governance (see Wilson 1974; Kahn 1968). Not surpris-
ingly, the Sherman review cannot spring the trap of its own political culture.
But that is no reason for politicians from other governance traditions (or
who are interested in other governance possibilities) to accept such appar-
ently negative outcomes as evidence if they derive from extra-scientific
(i.e. political cultural) correlations between types of interventions and of
evaluation methods.

Second, it follows that both American experimental community inter-
ventions, and the evaluations available, have ignored the vertical dimension
of community action — the linkages of communities and their members to
broader and wider sources of power, and their differential capacities to

4 Actual page numbers are unavailable since this quote is taken from the version published
on the internet — Sherman et al. (1997).

Sie. a Congressional mandate to review “the effectiveness of State and local crime
prevention assistance programs funded by the US Department of Justice”, 1998, p. 2.

“Enough evidence is available. . .to create provisional lists of what works. . those lists
will grow more quickly if the Nation invests more resources in scientific evaluations”
(Sherman et al. 1998, p. 1).
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 281

mobilise such extra-communal resources to support change at the local
level (Hope 1995). As Sherman notes: “. . uses of vertical solutions to date
have been relatively limited. . .leav[ing] untouched most of the risk factors.
But even local government decisions may make a difference” (in Sherman
et al. 1997, Chapter 3, emphasis added). Arguably, European policy anal-
ysis of crime reduction has been more attentive to the linkage between the
vertical and horizontal dimension as the explanation, and possible source
of remedy, for the community concentration effects of social exclusion than
has American policy analysis and evaluation (Pitts and Hope 1997).

We have sought to develop elsewhere an outline theory for an approach
to crime prevention in civil society (Hope and Karstedt 2003). In essence,
it typifies the vertical dimension of communities in terms of recent con-
ceptualisations of governance, seeing the resources for crime prevention
lying within communities themselves but needing, fundamentally, the for-
mal authority, legitimacy and support of extra-communal sources of power
to activate informal, intra-communal, social control. Strategies of gover-
nance are indirect, diffuse and networked through collective participation
in institutions. Our approach characterises the internal dimension of com-
munities — that is, the process that generates informal social control, also
called collective efficacy (Sampson et al. 1997) — as shaped by the mix of
different kinds of social capital generated in communities as a consequence
both of internal, affective, social relations and of participation in collective
activities and institutions. “Bonding social capital is the type produced
within families and small groups. Bridging social capital is embedded in
the links and relationships between different groups, for example, between
different ethnic groups or different classes and status groups. Linking social
capital is formed through the relationships that exist between individuals
(or groups) and the institutions and organisations in society. Linking social
capital not only defines specific, legal types of rights and obligations that
link people to organisations, but also their trust in such institutions. Indi-
viduals participate in the social capital of their groups and build a stock
of their own that integrates them into the social fabric and defines their
identities” (Hope and Karstedt 2003, p. 478; Karstedt 2004).

SELECTION EFFECTS IN COMMUNITY-BASED EVALUATION

The implication of this approach to community crime prevention for eval-
uation research is that an appropriate operationalisation of the theory — in
order for it to be tested (evaluated) — would contradict the methodological
precepts of the SMS. In essence, the theory outlined above implies a set of
necessary interaction effects in order to produce crime reduction outcomes;
but it is precisely these kinds of interaction effect that the SMS paradigm
282 T, HOPE

would construe as ‘threats to validity’. Broadly, these take the form of two
kinds of so-called threat:

Selection x Treatment Interactions

This could itself take two forms: (i.) where the intervention programme
cannot be separated from the social and political structures in which target
communities are embedded. For example, only certain kinds of community
are likely to support ‘neighbourhood watch’ community organisations, thus
state-agencies interested in establishing them will select only those kinds
of communities that provide fertile soil for neighbourhood watch groups
to flourish, and would be foolish and wasteful to implement them in less
supportive types of communities (Hope and Trickett 2004); (i1.) as a con-
sequence, a kind of ‘elective affinity’ (to use Weber’s term) is established
between treatment and selection, so that the one cannot operate without the
other, to the extent that the treatment itself comes to be defined in terms of
the selection criteria (i.e. the characteristics of the setting).

Treatment x Outcome (Mediation Effect)

The objective of the SMS evaluation paradigm is to ensure that it is the
treatment that causes the outcome — Conclusion I (Judd and Kenny 1981).
However, there are two other relations between treatment and outcome
that, although they more accurately define the process of change — through
a sequence of mediating processes — paradoxically reduce the correlation
between treatment and outcome that SMS designs endeavour to maximise;
for instance: Conclusion I — where the treatment causes the potential medi-
ator. Here, the treatment intervention into a community may actually seek
to enhance the ‘mediating variable’ — for example, the development of the
right mix of social capital. Thus, the intervention creates opportunities for
bridging capital to be developed, say, by creating intra-community organi-
sations, utilising and empowering community leaders (already possessing
‘linking’ social capital), which then empowers the community by creating
additional linking capital for community members, that enhances their ef-
forts to create bridging institutions, and so on. There is also Conclusion
II — the sum of these activities becomes the mediating variable (e.g. col-
lective efficacy), such that when it is controlled statistically, or in research
design, the direct correlation between the treatment variable (the originat-
ing governance intervention) and the outcome variable (i.e. crime) disap-
pears, even though it has actually had an important, though indirect, causal
influence.

Thus, the paradox is that were the evaluation research design to control
for these apparent threats to validity — or that an SMS review rejected the
evidence from studies that did not seem to have these qualities — it would
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 283

be likely to reject the influence of the treatment on the outcome when,
in practice, it had a very significant effect. In this case, it would be the
evaluation method itself, and not the intervention, that produced the result,
thus leading to Type II error inferences — that the treatment had no effect
when in fact it did’. Precisely these kinds of difficulties can be illustrated
by a concrete example taken from an evaluation of a community crime
prevention intervention.

A CASE STUDY

The case study to illustrate these problems of inference is taken from our
evaluation of the impact of the ‘Priority Estates Project’ (PEP) (Foster
and Hope 1993). During the late 1980s and early 1990s, the PEP operated
as consultant agents on ‘difficult-to-let’ and run down estates to institute
changes, in partnership with the local authority, in the delivery of local
housing services and management, and to involve tenants in the day-to-day
running of their estates. The PEP operated according toa ‘model’ of housing
management practice — what might now be called the PEP model of estate
governance; and we formulated a theory (set of propositions) as to how
we expected the model to bring about community-level crime reduction
outcomes (Foster and Hope 1993). The evaluation research design was
in the form of a quasi-experiment, a prospective non-equivalent control
group design (Cook and Campbell 1979). Data were collected by survey
and ethnography between 1987 (the pre-test condition) and 1990 (the post-
test condition). Two pairs of estates, each consisting of an ‘experimental’
estate (receiving the PEP intervention) and a ‘control’ estate, were studied,
respectively, in the city of Kingston-upon-Hull, and the London Borough
of Tower Hamlets. Both from a substantive research and a methodological
point of view, the Hull ‘experiment’ has received the most attention (see
Hope 1995); yet issues raised by the London comparison reveal some of
the problems arising from the application of the SMS criteria, ironically
revealed by the quasi-experimental design itself.®

Outcomes

Starting with outcomes, the evaluation appears to show rather startlingly
counter-intuitive results. Both property crime (Figure 1) and personal

7AlIthough the issue cannot be gone into here, there is also the problem of dealing with
the ‘unintended’ consequences of the treatment, that is, another form of mediation effect
where the treatment interacts with other variables to produce outcomes different from those
intended by the intervention (Hope 2002).

8Pawson and Tilley (1997) give an extended treatment of the Hull estates (pp. 97-103),
and scant attention to the London estates (p. 97).
284 T, HOPE

 

 

704
604 —
50-4
2
=
o
a
w
2
g 07
6
a
2
a
2 Experimental Estate
3
oS
£ W Control Estate
pre-test posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 1. Experimental versus control areas — household property crime victimisation
incidence (per 100 residents).

crime (Figure 2) victimisation of residents on their estates declined — but
at a far greater rate on the control estate than on the experimental es-
tate. Indeed, the reduction is dramatic and ought to have been notewor-
thy — the reported reduction in crime (including burglary) on the control
estate exceeded that registered during any other comparable (i.e. eval-
uated) crime reduction initiative during that period, including that at-
tributed to the much-vaunted Home Office Burglary Prevention Project
on the Kirkholt Estate, Rochdale (Hope 2002b). Yet, compared with the
latter, the causes of this reduction have received scarcely any attention
in the crime reduction policy literature. Presumably in part this is be-
cause the literature has either followed the general SMS approach which
would treat such effects as negative evidence about the ‘treatment’, or the
so-called “scientific realist’ approach that considers them of little value
since they would be seen merely as an artefact of an invalid research
design’.

? Pawson and Tilley (1997) note that Foster and Hope (1993) “.. represent their study
as a quasi-experimental one. . however... .this cannot add anything instructive, and indeed
it does not do so” (ibid., 97).
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 285

Experimental Estate

 

Incidence (per 100 residents)

2 1 Control Estate
pre-test posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 2. Experimental versus control areas — personal crime incidence (per 100 residents).

Selection x Treatment Effects

Yet the reality of what happened on each of the estates is much more re-
vealing about the impact of the intervention and, in a sense, is illustrated
particularly in the comparison between the two, afforded both by the re-
search design and the collection of data simultaneously on each estate!®. By
the end of the study period, many of the elements of the PEP model of estate
governance had been implemented aiso on the control estate (Foster and
Hope 1993, Table 11, p. 65). This came about for a number of reasons hav-
ing to do with the correlation between the ‘selection’ and the ‘treatment’. In
the first place, the principles incorporated in the PEP model were also being
commended (with accompanying incentives) generally and widely by the
sponsoring central government department. Thus, the convergence of the
treatment between the estates may have been due to external national and
borough-wide changes in policy from which few estates were exempt. The
control estate also benefited during this period from capital expenditure to
improve the security of the estate as a whole — again reflecting wider trends
in social housing management policy of the time.

!0This account is drawn from Foster and Hope (1993, Chapter 7), which provides further
detail.
286 T, HOPE

Yet there was also differential interaction between the treatment-
assignment and the quality of local housing management. As part of the
political negotiation with the Borough, the neighbourhood housing man-
ager for the control estate was given membership of the Research Ad-
visory Group for the study. The consequence was to induce what Cook
and Campbell (1979) call ‘compensatory rivalry by respondents receiving
less desirable treatments’|' — a variant of the general ‘Hawthorne Effect’
induced by participation in intervention programmes. Here, the local hous-
ing team responsible for the control estate, presumably at the instigation of
their neighbourhood housing manager, strove hard to implement as much
of the PEP model as they could and to deliver high-quality housing man-
agement. In contrast, in its early phases, the experimental estate suffered
from poor quality and obstructive local housing management, which set
back the implementation of the PEP model and may have prejudiced the
full implementation of the treatment, especially in undermining residents’
trust in the local authority.

In sum, the implementation of the treatment interacted with the selection
to the extent that the treatment (the selective introduction of the model
of estate governance) was partially vitiated on the experimental estate,
while it was mostly obviated on the control estate. Figure 3 shows the
outcome on residents’ expectations that resulted. Possibly because this
was a pleasant and unexpected outcome for the residents of the control
estate, expectations of estate improvement rose during the project; but
residents’ expectations fell on the experimental estate because the poorer
quality of the implementation process was disappointing and demoralising.
To that extent, the observed interactions between selection and treatment
reflected unintended consequences from an experimental point of view,
though actually supportive of the theory (of estate governance) on which
the intervention was predicated, producing predictable effects on crime and
community life, deducible from the theory that the evaluation was intended
to test (Foster and Hope, 1993),

Mediation Effects

Thus, crime did reduce on both estates, in both cases as a consequence
of residents’ maintenance of informal social control. As indicated in
Figures 4 and 5, the greater reduction in crime on the control estate, rel-
ative to the experimental estate, may have been produced by the greater
increase in residents’ informal social control activity on the control estate.

'l “Where the assignment of persons or organisational units to experimental and control
conditions is made public (as it frequently must be), conditions of social competition may
be generated. The control group, as the natural underdog, may be motivated to reduce or
reverse the expected difference” (Cook and Campbell 1979, p. 54).
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 287

445

427

404

387

36 4

34 4

324

 

 

 

304 ane
e ~ a Experimental Estate
g .
a 28 ‘ Control Estate
pre-test posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 3. Experimental versus control areas — “area will improve in the next two years”
(per cent. residents).

Again, this observed outcome is deducible from the theory of community
crime prevention — that improved ‘vertical’ linkage (greater on the control
estate, see Figure 3), interacts with ‘horizontal’ social relations to produce
a mediated effect — informal social control — that reduces crime.

Selection x Mediation Effects

A further mediation effect — contributing to the different outcomes on the
experimental and control estates — also came about as a result of differ-
ential estate population (compositional) change, partly as a consequence
of differential (estate) selection effects. As illustrated in Figure 6, the pro-
portion of Bengali residents increased on both estates, at a greater rate on
the experimental than on the control estate. At that time, the Borough as
a whole was experiencing considerable housing pressure with regard to
the distribution of the Bengali population — the control estate was located
in the Western part of the Borough, the initial area of Bengali settlement.
As a result of housing pressure and area redevelopment, the control es-
tate Bengali population grew substantially, such that they comprised the
majority ethnic group on the estate by the end of the ‘experiment’. The
Borough’s housing strategy was also to alleviate pressure by resettling
288 T, HOPE

845

824

8074

78

 

76 4

744

 

 

= Experimental Estate

o

2

& 72 1 Control Estate
pre-test posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 4. Experimental versus control areas — “feel responsible for area around home
(territoriality)” (per cent. residents).

Bengali families in the Eastern end of the Borough — where the experi-
mental estate was located. There was a greater surplus of accommodation
on estates in this area, though hitherto it had not been an area of settle-
ment for the Bengali population, largely because the dominant community
was perceived, at best, as ‘traditionally East End ° or, at worst, hostile and
racist.

Figures 7-10 show that, on both estates, the Bengali community’s ex-
ercise of informal social control converged to the level practiced by white
residents!*. Since, by the end of the experiment, Bengalis now consti-
tuted the majority of residents on the control estate, overall informal so-
cial control may have risen to a proportionately greater level than on
the experimental estate (Figures 4 and 5). Since Bengalis were no more
likely to be victimised than white residents, on either estate, neither before
nor after the intervention (Foster and Hope 1993, p. 42), it would seem
that the relative increase in informal social control on the control estate
was a contextual effect brought about by the treatment (better housing

'2 The decline in ‘territoriality’ of Bengali residents on the experimental estate may have
been due to a relaxation of vigilance, or an artefact of small numbers in the first survey.
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 289

664

625

604

58 4

564

Experimental estate

 

per cent

54 Control Estate
pre-test posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 5. Experimental versus control areas — “ask neighbours to keep watch” (per cent.
residents).

management) rather than a consequence merely of population composi-
tional change. A result again deducible from the theory of community crime
prevention.

Nevertheless, ethnographic evidence suggests a differential empower-
ment effect on the experimental estate between the two ethnic groups, that
resulted in a mediation of the treatment: while the incoming Bengali resi-
dents interacted positively with the treatment (i.e. PEP consultants plus the
local housing management), white and Afro-Caribbean residents tended to
become demoralised — possibly because of dashed expectations resulting
from the initially poorer quality implementation of the estate governance
model -see Figure 3. Feeding off white residents’ inherent attitudes, this de-
moralisation congealed into a resentment of the Bengalis’ perceived ‘pref-
erential treatment’ by PEP, fuelling a further disengagement and resistance
to the ‘treatment’ amongst white residents (Foster and Hope 1993, Chap-
ter 5): “...in this climate, white residents became apathetic rather than
aggressive. . .[because they were] a disparate group with little in common”
(ibid, p. 43). In contrast, then, to the control estate, the residents on the
experimental estate collectively did not raise informal control on the estate
to an appreciably higher level — although this was substantially higher than
290 T, HOPE

80>

705

40+

305

Experimental Estate

 

Per Cent Residents
é
L

a Control Estate
pre-test posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 6. Experimental versus control areas — change in Bengali resident population (per
cent. residents).

the control estate at the outset. White residents became more apathetic and
less empowered, Bengali residents became more empowered though still
few in numbers to make an appreciable impact. In contrast, Bengali resi-
dents on the control estate became as empowered as Bengali residents on
the experimental estate, but because they were greater in number, achieved
a greater impact on informal control, and hence reduction in crime, than
on the experimental estate.

CONCLUSION

The conclusion of this paper is that, despite the evident allure for policy-
makers of the experimental paradigm, and the claims made by its protag-
onists, it may not be the most useful method of policy evaluation, espe-
cially applied to interventions that aim to affect the institutions, norms and
social practices of civil society. As this case study has shown, rigorous
application of the methodological precepts of the experimental paradigm
in the interpretation of results can have seriously misleading policy con-
sequences — especially the unfounded rejection of what might otherwise
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 291

704

405

204

Bengali

 

per cent

10 White
pre-test posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 7. Experimental Area: Bengali versus White residents — “ask neighbours to keep
watch” (per cent.)

be useful and informative results, that is, Type II Error. Here, the prob-
lem does not so much lie in the reliability of the evidence generated by
evaluation research (which can be as good or as bad as its social scien-
tific methodology allows) but in its validity — that is, in the method of
inference of its logic of scientific enquiry (Popper 2002). In respect of the
case study reported here, a ‘non-experimental’ interpretation of an ‘ex-
periment’ yielded more interpretable results than one that faithfully held
to purely experimental precepts of inference. To that extent, it is the par-
ticular scientific interpretation — encapsulated in the hierarchy of values
of Maryland Scientific Methods Scale — rather than the research meth-
ods themselves, that undermines these protagonists’ claims to political
utility.

We have noted the rise of a new set of policy-oriented ‘crime sciences’
who are claiming attention, in part on the grounds of their respective

13 Which is not to say, as Pawson and Tilley (1997) claim, that Foster and Hope (1993) is
an exemplar of the so-called ‘scientific realist’ method, since the logic of enquiry pursued
in the evaluation of its research findings (which have been elaborated upon here) stands
against the principle of induction (Popper 2002) that would seem to underpin their own
methodological recommendations.
292 T, HOPE

705

404 a

Bengali

 

per cent

30 White
pre-test posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 8. Control Area: Bengali versus White residents — “ask neighbours to keep watch”
(per cent.)

evaluation methodologies (Hope and Karstedt 2003). Representatives of
both of the current ‘camps’ of protagonists — “experimentalists’ and ‘real-
ists’ alike — were aware of the case study examined here and could have
had the results available to them in published form at the time they were
conducting their reviews (Sherman et al. 1997; Pawson and Tilley 1997).
Yet both chose to ignore or over-look them, arguably for similar reasons
— that the inferences did not arise from the methodological nostrums that
they were asserting in support of their claims regarding useful knowl-
edge. Attention has focused in this paper on the experimental paradigm;
different arguments, though with the same effect, can be made regard-
ing the realist paradigm (see Hope 2004, 2002). In either case, though,
the pursuit of such claim-making (via methodological precept) regarding
‘what works’ in crime reduction risks leading their respective protago-
nists towards error as much as it does towards certainty. To the extent
that these errors induce false rather than true conclusions, they will be
responsible for introducing error into the legitimising claims about the
efficacy of policy made by government; that is, of evidence leading pol-
icy. And there is real political damage here: not only may policy-makers
be discouraged from particular policies that they might otherwise have
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 293

1109

100 4

904

804

Bengali

per cent

70
pre-test

 

White

 

posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 9. Experimental Area: Bengali versus White residents — “feel responsible for area
around home (territoriality) (per cent.)

 

 

905
807
70 4
5 Bengali
o
a 60 White
pre-test

posttest

Pre-test vs. Post-test

Figure 10. Control Area: Bengali versus White residents — “feel responsible for area around
home (territoriality) (per cent.)
294 T, HOPE

found ideologically congenial, or felt they had an electoral mandate to
pursue, but also, their political acumen is being subverted by false scien-
tific conclusions. Thus, these scientists are also risking their own legiti-
macy, if ever politicians come to suspect that their trust in science has been
traduced.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This paper was written initially at the invitation of Margaret Shaw and
Daniel Sansfacgon of the International Centre for the Prevention of Crime
(ICPC) and presented at a panel organised for the Societies of Criminology
First Key Issues Conference ‘What Works in Reducing Crime’, Paris, 13-15
May 2004. I am also grateful to Susanne Karstedt for several discussions
relevant to the concerns of this paper.

REFERENCES

Bennett, T., D. Farrington, and K. Holloway, (no date) The Effectiveness of Neigh-
bourhood Watch: Protocal for the Campbell Collaboration in Crime and Justice.
www.campbellcollaboration.org/fralibrary.html, accessed 4 May 2004.

Brantingham, P.J. and FL. Faust, A conceptual model of crime prevention. Crime and
Delinquency, 22, pp. 284-296. Reprinted in T. Hope (Ed.) (2000). Perspectives on Crime
Reduction. The International Library of Criminology, Criminal Justice and Penology.
Aldershot, Hants.: Ashgate Publishing, 1976.

Campbell Collaboration. www.campbellcollaboration.org/index-html, accessed 4 May
2004, 2004

Cook, T.D. and D.T. Campbell, Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis Issues for
Field Settings. Boston, MA.: Houghton Mifflin, 1979.

Foster, J. and T. Hope, Housing, Community and Crime: The impact of the Priority Estates
Project. Home Office Research Study No. 131. London: HMSO, 1993.

Halpern, R., Rebuilding the Inner City. New York: Columbia University Press, 1995.

Heckman, J., ‘Microdata, heterogeneity, and the evaluation of public policy: Nobel Lecture.
Journal of Political Economy, 109, 673-748, 2001.

Heckman, J. and J.A. Smith, Assessing the case for social experiments. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 9, 85-110, 1995.

Hope, T., Inference and governance in crime reduction evaluation research. Paper presented
at the Scottish Criminology Conference, University of Edinburgh, September, 2005,
2005.

Hope, T., Pretend it works: Evidence and governance in the evaluation of the Reducing
Burglary Initiative. Criminal Justice, 4 (3), 287-308, 2004.

Hope, T., “What’s “what”, and what does “works” mean?’. Paper presented to the British
Criminology Conference, Keele, July 2002, 2002a.

Hope, T., The road taken: Evaluation, replication and crime reduction. In: G. Hughes, E.
McLaughlin and J. Muncie (Eds.), Crime Prevention and Community Safety. London:
Sage Publications, pp. 37-57, 2002b.
THE ‘ANTI-SOCIAL’ BIAS IN THE MARYLAND SCALE 295

Hope, T., ‘Community crime prevention’. In: C. Nuttall, P. Goldblatt and C. Lewis (Eds.),
Reducing Offending: an assessment of research evidence on ways of dealing with of-
fending behaviour. Home Office Research Study 187. London: Home Office. Pp. 51-62,
1998.

Hope, T., Community crime prevention. In M. Tonry and D.P. Farrington (Eds). Building a
Safer Society: Strategic Approaches to Crime Prevention. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, 19, 21-89, 1995.

Hope, T. and A. Trickett, ‘Angst Essen Seele Auf. . but it keeps away the burglars! private
security, Neighbourhood Watch and the social reaction to crime’. KéIner Zeitschrift fiir
Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie, Sonderheft 43, 441-468, 2004.

Hope, T. and Susanne Karstedt, ‘Towards a new social crime prevention’. In: H. Kury and J.
Obergfell-Fuchs (Eds.), Crime Prevention: New Approaches. Mainz, De.: Weisse Ring
Verlag-GmbH. pp. 461-489, 2003.

Judd, C.M. and D.A. Kenny, Estimating the Effect of Social Interventions. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1981.

Kahn, AJ. “From delinquency treatment to community development’. In: P. F. Lazarsfeld,
W.H. Sewell, and H.L. Wilensky (Eds.), The Uses of Sociology, London: Weidenfeld
and Nicolson. Reprinted in T. Hope (Ed.) (2000), Perspectives on Crime Reduction. The
International Library of Criminology, Criminal Justice and Penology. Aldershot, Hants:
Ashgate Publishing, 1968.

Karstedt, S., Linking Capital: Institutionelle Dimensionen sozialen Kapitals. In: F. Kessel
and H.-U. Otto (Hrsg) Soziale Arbeit und soziales Kapital. Zur Kritik lokaler Gemein-
schaftlichkeit. 45-62. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag fuer Sozialwissenschaften, 2004.

Oakley, A. Experiments in Knowing. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000.

Pawson, R. and N. Tilley, Realistic Evaluation. London: Sage, 1997.

Pitts, J. and T. Hope, “The local politics of inclusion: The State and community safety’. Social
Policy and Administration, Reprinted in T. Hope (Ed.), (2000). Perspectives on Crime
Reduction. The International Library of Criminology, Criminal Justice and Penology.
31, pp 37-58, Aldershot, Hants: Ashgate Publishing, 1997.

Popper, K., The Logic of Scientific Enquiry. Routledge Classics. London and New York:
Routledge, 2002.

Sampson, R.J. and W.J. Wilson, ‘Towards a theory of race, crime and urban inequality’.
In: J. Hagan and R.D. Peterson (Eds.), Crime and Inequality. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1995.

Sampson, R.J.,S.W. Raudenbusch and F. Earls, Neighbourhoods and violent crime: A multi-
level study of collective efficacy’. Science, 277, pp. 918-24. Reprinted In: T. Hope (Ed.)
(2000). Perspectives on Crime Reduction. The International Library of Criminology,
Criminal Justice and Penology. Aldershot, Hants. : Ashgate Publishing, 1997.

Sherman, L.W., D.C Gottfredeson, D.L. MacKenzie, J. Eck, P. Reuter and S. Bushway,
Preventing Crime: What Works, What Doesn’t, What's Promising. Research in Brief,
July 1998. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice. Reprinted in T. Hope
(Ed.) (2000). Perspectives on Crime Reduction. The International Library of Crim-
inology, Criminal Justice and Penology. Aldershot, Hants. : Ashgate Publishing,
1997.

Sherman, L.W., D.C Gottfredeson, D.L. MacKenzie, J. Eck, P. Reuter and S. Bushway,
Preventing Crime: What Works, What Doesn't, What’ s Promising. Washington, D.C. US
Office of Justice Programs. (also published as www.ncjrs.org/works/index.html, accessed
in 1997), 1997.

Welsh, B., D.P. Farrington, L.W. Sherman, D.L. MacKenzie, ‘What do we know about
crime prevention?’. International Annals of Criminology, 40, pp. 11-31, 2002.
296 T, HOPE

Wilson, J.Q., ‘Crime and the criminologists’, Commentary, 1974, 47-53. Reprinted in
T. Hope (Ed.) (2000). Perspectives on Crime Reduction. The International Library of
Criminology, Criminal Justice and Penology. Aldershot, Hants. : Ashgate Publishing,
1974.

Centre for Criminological Research
Keele University

Staffordshire STS 5BG, UK
E-mail: t.j.hope@crim.keele.ac.uk
