 

 

The Homosexual Adolescent: Developmental Issues and Social Bias
Author(s): ALAN K. MALYON

Source: Child Welfare, Vol. 60, No. 5 (May 1981), pp. 321-330
Published by: Child Welfare League of America

Stable URL: https://www .jstor.org/stable/45393793

Accessed: 22-11-2022 12:25 UTC

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Child Welfare League of America is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Child Welfare

 

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
PRACTICE FORUM

The Homosexual Adolescent:
Developmental Issues
and Social Bias

 

ALAN K. MALYON

The problem of adapting to a stigmatized identity is
inherently problematic. In particular, the social
disapproval of same-sex object choice seriously

complicates psychological development and identity
formation for the homosexual adolescent. Thus, the
resulting developmental variations must be understood
as, in large measure, natural reactions to biased
socialization experiences.

Until very recently “homosexuality” had both a vernacular and an offi-
cial psychiatric meaning. In 1973, however, the American Psychiatric As-
sociation voted to depathologize homosexuality and remove it from the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual.* This official change, though, did not
eliminate the social opprobrium, or dispel the myths and stereotypes
long associated with the vernacular aspects of the homosexual label.
Therefore, to understand the special problems of the gay adolescent, it is

* The American Psychological Association made a similar change in official policy in 1975.

 

Alan K. Malyon, Ph.D., is in the private practice of clinical psychology in Los An-
geles.

0009-4021 /81/050321-10 $01.25 © Child Welfare League of America

321

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
322 CHILD WELFARE / Volume LX, Number S$ / May 1981

necessary to appreciate the ways in which contemporary psychological
and social views of homosexuality bias the developmental process.

Homosexuality as a Social Issue

Homosexuality describes an aspect of the self. It is a cathected potential.
It refers to same-sex object choice. That is, homosexuality is an orienta-
tion in which same-sex affectional and erotic desires predominate. It is a
natural developmental outcome that emerges from the same psychosex-
ual matrix as does heterosexuality.

According to Money, sexual preference is a neurocognitional func-
tion. “The process of establishing sexual preference takes place primari-
ly after birth and the basic fundamentals are completed before puberty.
The principles whereby all this happens await elucidation” [15:431]. This,
of course, implies that object choice is predisposed by the time adoles-
cence begins. Furthermore, it indicates that the developmental variables
that contribute to the evolution of sexual orientation cannot be specified
at the present time. There has been considerable disagreement regarding
both the age of fixation and the etiology of object choice. Nevertheless,
the bulk of empirical data and clinical evidence suggests that Money’s
conclusions are veridical. Science is currently unable to specify the pro-
cess by which sexual orientation, either heterosexual or homosexual, is
established. In addition, object choice tends toward immutability by the
end of latency [12].

The controversy over these issues has been primarily related to the
question of whether or not homosexuality is a clinical entity or, instead, a
social issue. If it is thought of as a form of psychopathology, then the
question of etiology takes on great social and clinical significance. When
“causes” are specified, then prevention strategies can be developed. It is
the illness model of homosexuality that has prompted most of the re-
search and speculation aimed at discovering the variables that result in
same-sex attraction.

Nonpejorative Homosexuality

In a recent article reviewing 18 studies conducted between 1957 and 1974,
Meredith and Riester showed that the concept of homosexuality-as-path-
ology has not been adequately supported by empirical evidence
[14:174-193]. The illness assumption has also been conceptually and the-

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Malyon / Homosexual Adolescents and Social Bias 323

oretically refuted by Weinberg [18], Clark [2], Silverstein [16], Marmor
[11], Bell and Weinberg [1], and Freedman [7]. In its place, a nonpathol-
ogy model of homosexual desire has evolved. This model of same-sex ob-
ject choice can also be referred to as nonpejorative homosexuality. This
latter designation indicates that same-sex erotic and affectional desires do
not imply either psychopathology or mental health. That is, in the non-
pejorative sense, homosexuality is regarded as no more than an indica-
tion of erotic predilection.

Homophobia

Despite these theoretical developments, the present cultural ethos con-
tinues to manifest an emphatic disapproval of same-sex eroticism and in-
timacy. This antihomosexual sentiment is referred to as homophobia
[18]. Homophobia is a paroxysmal and hostile fear of homosexuality. It
is not a response to some real threat in the object universe. Instead, it is a
markedly dereistic and overdetermined reaction to the stigma and myth-
ology associated with homosexuality.

Homophobic beliefs and attitudes have become codified. Their influ-
ence is seen in law, social policies, religious beliefs, child-rearing prac-
tices, and educational curricula. In this sense, homosexuality is an extant
social issue which has potent developmental significance. That is, anti-
homosexual bias has become an intrinsic aspect of the socialization pro-
cess and, in this way, has a critical impact on ego epigenesis. The special
developmental consequences of homophobia on personality formation
are of current research and clinical interest. They are especially germane
to the issue of adolescent homosexuality.

Adolescent Homosexuality

The Evolution of Homosexual Awareness

During the adolescent years the potential for homosexual self-labeling
begins. With the maturation of erotic and intimate capacities, homosex-
ual preferences first become perceptible. This new dimension of self-
awareness is usually accompanied by considerable anxiety; the adoles-
cent who is struggling with homoerotic impulses must contend with a fear
of social disapproval along with significant intrapsychic conflict. Since
homosexual desires usually cannot be repressed, the most common ad-
aptation to an awareness of their presence is a compartmentalization of

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
324 CHILD WELFARE / Volume LX, Number 5 / May 1981

sexual desire, often leading to a fragmentation of identity. Homophobic
content becomes internalized and often causes protracted dysphoria and
feelings of self-contempt. The juxtaposition of homosexual desire and ac-
culturated self-criticism is inimical to healthy psychological develop-
ment.

The Issue of Adolescent Sexual Identity -

Before proceeding, it is important to establish whether there is such a per-
son as a homosexual adolescent. Many theorists and clinicians have re-
garded all reports of adolescent homosexual fantasy or behavior as mere-
ly an indication of “sexual identity confusion.” Same-sex eroticism, in
other words, has been seen as no more than a transient developmental
phenomenon. The typical psychotherapeutic response to adolescent dis-
closures of homosexual desire has been to attenuate the anxiety by reas-
suring the adolescent that same-sex erotic impulses are normal and do
not indicate the existence of a fixed homosexual orientation. While it is
true that homoerotic fantasies, and even overt behaviors, do not neces-
sarily predict adult homosexual object choice [17:378-382], it appears
equally true, as already noted, that the issue of sexual orientation is of-
ten settled by the time adolescence begins. Therefore, to always interpret
adolescent homosexual impulses as incidental is a therapeutic error. It
both misleads and fails to address the socialized attitudes that make the
existence of same-sex eroticism both frightening and unacceptable.
Daher suggests that this approach is an imposition of an inappropriate
heterosexual bias [3:12-17]. It implicitly supports the notion that homo-
sexuality is an undesirable and/or inferior sexual orientation. Further-
more, it leaves the client vulnerable to psychologically disorganizing con-
flict and self-loathing if the homosexual impulses persist or reemerge at a
later time.

It is necessary, then, to exercise both prudence and discretion in re-
sponding clinically to a report of homosexual feelings or behavior. There
are certainly instances where homoerotic urges are no more than epi-
phenomena in the evolution of fixed heterosexual object choice. That is,
there are times when same-sex desires during adolescence do not indicate
the presence of incipient homosexuality. Nevertheless, at least one of
every 10 reports of same-sex erotic interest will be made by a young per-
son who is, or will be, predominantly homosexual [10]. In both in-
stances, anxiety and confusion are likely. It is important, therefore, to re-
spond to all such disclosures in a supportive and unbiased way. The ado-
lescent is in need of accurate information on the meaning of homosexual

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Malyon / Homosexual Adolescents and Social Bias 325

desire. It should be described as a natural developmental outcome, and
one that does not imply either psychopathology or developmental arrest.
Further, both cultural and personal attitudes toward homosexuality
should be addressed. It must be emphasized that homosexuality is not,
inherently, a problem, but that social opprobrium (homophobia) often
makes it so. Homoerotic desires should be valued and explored in the
same way that heterosexual impulses are. The clinician should aim at fa-
cilitating experimentation, understanding, and self-acceptance. In this
way, “sexual identity confusion” can be resolved. In addition, the con-
flicts, anxiety, and feelings of self-degradation that often accompany the
acknowledgment of homosexual impulses can be attenuated.

As the foregoing implies, the attitudes of the clinician are a critical var-
iable in successful psychotherapeutic interventions with the gay or les-
bian adolescent. Homophobic attitudes are inimical to the development
of a positive gay identity. Therefore, the clinician who works with the
adolescent homosexual must have engaged in sufficient reeducation, con-
sciousness raising, introspection and conflict resolution to ensure that
antihomosexual bias does not contaminate the treatment process.

A common and rather subtle form of bias is manifested in the “fear of
influencing the adolescent toward a homosexual orientation.” This con-
cern usually indicates both a lack of information and the presence of bias.
The tendency of clinicians to be concerned only with their influence on
the development of a homosexual preference needs to be recognized as a
manifestation of the influence of social values, and not an expression of
therapeutic objectivity [Davison, 1976]. A more appropriate concern
would be that of helping the adolescent develop a positive self-concept
and a genuine capacity for intimacy, irrespective of sexual orientation [4].

The Special Problems of the Adolescent Homosexual

Until recent years developmentalists viewed psychosocial ontogeny as a
function of intrapsychic maturation. That is, “stages” were thought to
occur according to an inner logic and necessity. It has now become clear
that developmental processes and outcomes cannot be explained by an
exclusive reference to intrapsychic phenomena. Instead, development is a
complex interaction of individual psychological traits and capacities in
combination with the possibilities and limitations of a specific social con-
text.

At this time, it is not known whether there are initial intrapsychic dif-
ferences between heterosexuals and homosexuals. There is no evidence,

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
326 CHILD WELFARE / Volume LX, Number 5 / May 1981

however, to suggest that such differences do exist. It is unquestionable,
however, that important exogenous differences operate at all postpubes-
cent levels of development. Homophobia serves to create a unique, and
usually hostile, psychosocial milieu for the incipient homosexual. And
profound developmental consequences result from this.

The task of adolescence is that of identity formation [6]. To consoli-
date an ego identity, the adolescent must engage in extensive experimen-
tal behavior to learn the roles and experiences congruent with innate ca-
pacities and already established psychological patterns, defenses, and
processes. Social interaction provides information on the acceptability of
various forms of self-expression. Identity is, in many respects, a psycho-
social phenomenon that develops in an interpersonal context. and serves
as the basis for all subsequent object relations. It is out of the formation
of an identity that the capacity for mature intimacy evolves.

To complete the developmental! tasks of adolescence, then, there must
be adequate opportunities for extensive social involvements and inter-
personal attachments with peers. Primitive and undifferentiated parental
dependency must be transformed, through intense social involvement, in-
to an adult capacity for love and intimacy. This process is an intrinsic as-
pect of identity formation. The gay or lesbian adolescent is often a vic-
tim of a selectively purloined developmental phenomenology. That is, be-
cause of the antipathy associated with homosexuality, many critical so-
cial experiences are not available to homosexual adolescents. For exam-
ple, their most charged sexual desires are usually seen as perverted, and
their deepest feelings of psychological attachment are regarded as unac-
ceptable. This social disapproval interferes with the preintimacy involve-
ments that foster the evolution of maturity and self-respect in the do-
main of object relations.

The result of these missing developmental experiences is that a com-
plete resolution of the adolescent identity crisis is precluded. Further-
more, conflicts over homosexual desires are usually enhanced and there is
frequently an attempt to eschew this aspect of the self.

Modes of Homosexual Adaptation

There are three common adaptations to the dilemma of the homosexual
adolescent: a) repression of same-sex desires; b) a developmental mora-
torium in which homosexual impulses are suppressed in favor of a het-
erosexual or asexual orientation; c) homosexual disclosure and the deci-
sion to mobilize same-sex desires.

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Malyon / Homosexual Adolescents and Social Bias 327

Repression. The adolescent who represses same-sex desires is making
the most primitive and least satisfactory adaptation to the homosexual is-
sue, Repression of these impulses almost always eventuates in an unantic-
ipated manifestation of the egodystonic sexual material at a later time.
This often elicits panic and/or a major disruption of established coping
strategies and life patterns, since there has been no opportunity to inte-
grate the homosexual desires. The psychological economy is usually un-
able to accommodate the unexpected new awareness without significant
temporary disorganization.

Suppression. For those individuals who only suppress homosexual im-
pulses during adolescence there is a different, more positive prognosis.
The suppression of same-sex eroticism results in a temporary develop-
mental moratorium. The process of identity formation is truncated and
the individual attempts to accommodate to the values and role-expecta-
tions of the heterosexual culture. Very often career overachievement
binds homosexual conflicts and compensates for feelings of inadequacy
and unacceptability. Distinct underachievement, however, is another re-
action to the feelings of alienation and perversion. Sometimes an at-
tempt is made to bolster. the suppression of homoerotic impulses by in-
volvement in a heterosexual marriage.

In many instances of early homosexual suppression there is a chronic
state of psychological unrest and disequilibrium. Integrity and a genuine
sense of self-respect are difficult to achieve so long as significant aspects
of personal identity are hidden and regarded as contemptible. It is, there-
fore, not uncommon to find identity issues reemerging in the third or
fourth decades. At that time, an effort is made to acknowledge and inte-
grate homoerotic impulses rather than suppress them. Homosexual self-
disclosure is referred to as “coming out.” The coming-out experience is
an aspect of identity formation and is usually accompanied by an elabo-
ration of the processes and conflicts critical during primary adolescence.
An intense period of sexual experimentation usually occurs, with a tran-
sient preoccupation with physical appearance and a great concern with
peer approval and acceptance. Intense but brief intimate involvements
are common, as is a renewed and vigorous interest in social activities that
are central in adolescence and young adulthood. Many of the motiva-
tions that drive these interests and activities are subconscious. They of-
ten appear, and are experienced, as immature. They have a high affective
charge and, frequently, a driven quality. The nature of these psychoso-
cial phenomena can best be understood as part of the second epoch of a
biphasic adolescence. The suppression of homosexual impulses during

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
328 CHILD WELFARE / Volume LX, Number 5 / May 1981

primary adolescence results in an interruption and mitigation of the pro-
cess of identity formation. The coming-out experience prompts another
phase of psychological growth, similar to that which has primacy during
age-appropriate adolescence. The goal of this second phase is a psycho-
logical integration of the previously compartmentalized and rejected sex-
ual and intimate capacities, Thus, the biphasic adolescence of the homo-
sexual individual facilitates the completion of the process of adult identi-
ty formation.

Disclosure. For the individual who opts for a homosexual identity dur-
ing adolescence, many problems complicate and interfere with a desira-
ble outcome to the developmental process. Social attitudes militate
against feelings of self-acceptance. Few, if any, institutional and/or ritu-
alized social activities, support groups, or agency services exist for the ho-
mosexual minor. The majority of openly lesbian and gay adolescents are
alienated from their peers as well as from the larger heterosexual culture.
In addition, they have little access to the gay or lesbian communities,
since most such social activities and establishments are adult-oriented. In
addition, laws that require parental consent for psychological treatment
make it difficult for the homosexual adolescent to obtain self-affirming
social or psychotherapeutic services. Most parents will accept only con-
version (to heterosexuality) treatment goals, and this is rarely what the
self-acknowledged homosexual minor is seeking. Also, homophobic cul-
tural attitudes have made it very difficult to get approval or funding for
public programs designed to assist the gay or lesbian adolescent.
Self-acknowledged homosexual adolescents, then, are often an
alienated and neglected population. The personal, social, and institu-
tional support systems that assist the adolescent heterosexual minor are
not available to the homosexual minor. As might be expected, this situa-
tion often produces rather morbid psychological consequences. The ho-
mosexual adolescent must either try to complete the developmental pro-
cess in a hostile and psychologically impoverished heterosexual social en-
vironment or must decide to seek peer support and social opportunities
in the homosexual community. Neither alternative is very satisfactory.
The decision to remain in the heterosexual community nearly always re-
sults in estrangement and confusion. A move into the homosexual com-
munity precipitates a separation from parents, and requires premature
assumption of adult responsibilities and social roles. Very often it is im-
possible to find a job and the necessities of everyday life become urgent.

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Malyon / Homosexual Adolescents and Social Bias 329

A frequent adaptation to this set of problems is street prostitution. This
unsavory milieu is usually not conducive to healthy psychological devel-
opment.

This is not to say that coming out is an inherently deleterious process
or pernicious decision. To the contrary, the research of Friend
[8:231-248], De Monteflores and Schultz [5:59-72], and Kimmel
[9:28-31] suggest that coming out can have distinct psychological bene-
fits. In fact, Kimmel states:

It is possible this crisis [coming-out] early in the gay person’s
adult life, one that can involve extensive family disruption, in-
tense feelings, and sometimes alienation from the family—may
be one of the most significant a gay person will face. Once re-
solved, it may provide a perspective on major life crises and a
sense of crisis competence that buffers the person against later
crises. [10:117]

“Crisis competence” is clearly a psychological asset. In addition, the gen-
uine self-respect and ego integrity that are possible only for the disclos-
ing adolescent are further developmental advantages. Those adaptations
that rely on denial and/or the maintenance of a false identity are frag-
menting and require a hypercathexis of defensive operations. Neverthe-
less, the societal stigma attached to homosexuality usually makes even
disclosure a difficult developmental course for the homosexual adoles-
cent,

Conclusion

In actuality, then, each of the possible adaptations to adolescent. homo-
sexuality tends to be problematic, and will remain so until advocacy ef-
forts succeed in changing both cultural attitudes and social policies. U1-
timately, the goal must be to extinguish the stereotypical notions and irra-
tional fears that serve as the basis for antihomosexual bias. In the mean-
time, both public and private psychological services must become more
responsive to the special needs of the gay and lesbian adolescent. Psy-
chotherapeutic intervention, for many, is the only effective means of
ameliorating the unfortunate consequences of biased and impoverished
socialization. 4

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
330

ho

16.
(7.

CHILD WELFARE / Volume LX, Number 5 / May 1981

References

Bell, A., and Weinberg, M. Homosexualities: A Study of Diversity among Men and
Women. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1978.

Clark, D. Loving Someone Gay. Millbrae, CA: Celestial Arts, 1977.

Daher, D. “Sexual Identity Confusion in Late Adolescence: Therapy and Values.”
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice 14 (1977).

Davison, G. “Homosexuality: The Ethical Challenge.” Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology 2 (1976).

De Monteflores, C., and Schultz, S. “Coming out: Similarities and Differences for
Lesbians and Gay Men.” Journal of Social Issues 34 (1979).

Erikson, E. Childhood and Society. New York: W.W. Norton, 1950.

Freedman, M. Homosexuality among Women and Psychological Adjustment. Un-
published doctoral dissertation, Case Western Reserve University, 1967.

Friend, R. “GAYing: Adjustment and the Older Gay Male.” Alternative Lifestyles 3
(1980). :

Kimmel, D. “Patterns of Aging among Gay Men.” Christopher Street, November
1977.

Kimmel, D. “Adult Development and Aging: A Gay Perspective.” Journal of Social
Issues 34 (1978).

Kinsey, A.C.; Pomeroy, W.; and Martin, C. Sexual Behavior in the Human Male.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1948.

Marmor, J. ““Homosexuality and the Issue of Mental Illness,” in Homosexual Behav-
ior: A Modern Reappraisal, edited by J. Marmor. NY: Basic Books, 1980.
Marmor, J. ‘Homosexuality and Cultural Value Systems.” American Journal of Psy-
chiatry” 11 (1973).

Meredith, R., and Riester, R. “Psychotherapy, Responsibility, and Homosexuality:
Clinical Examination of Socially Deviant Behavior.” Journal! of Professional Psy-
chology 11 (1980).

Money, J. “Factors in the Genesis of Homosexuality,” in Determinants of Sexual Be-
havior, edited by G. Winokar. Springfield IL: Charles C Thomas, 1963.
Silverstein, C. A Family Matter. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977.

Tindall, R. “The Male Adolescent Involved with a Pederast Becomes an Adult.” Jour-
nal of Homosexuality 3 (1978).

Weinberg, G. Society and the Healthy Homosexual. New York: St. Martin's Press,
1972,

 

(Address requests for a reprint to Alan K. Malyon, Ph.D., 3210 De Witt Dr., Los
Angeles, CA 90068.)

This content downloaded from 132.74.210.56 on Tue, 22 Nov 2022 12:25:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
