 © 2006 Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society. Reproduction  with permission only. Contact perms@amsci.org.A reprint from American Scientist the magazine of Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society This reprint is provided for personal and noncommercial use. For any other use, please send a request to Permissions,  American Scientist, P .O. Box 13975, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709, U.S.A., or by electronic mail to perms@amsci. org. ©Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society and other rightsholders 542     American Scientist, Volume 94© 2006 Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society. Reproduction  with permission only. Contact perms@amsci.org.The summer of 1994 was our first season to - gether in the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone, a  region within a 30-kilometer radius of the Cher - nobyl Nuclear Power Plant. We were there to  investigate the long-term biological effects of  ionizing radiation following the catastrophic ex - plosion and fire at reactor number four on April  26, 1986, which released plumes of radionu - clides that spread across Europe. We were only  2 kilometers from the defunct power plant, and  the area was still so radioactive that our Geiger  counters were perpetually abuzz. Although the  “Zone” was now nearly deserted—more than  135,000 people had been evacuated from the  region—we were amazed by the diversity of  mammals living in the shadow of the ruined  reactor only eight years after the meltdown. The  odd juxtaposition was eerily reminiscent of one  of the creepier Twilight Zone  episodes. We were in an area known as the “red for - est,” so named from the predominant hue of  the trees, which had been discolored in death  by the radiation. All the pine trees were dead;  only birches remained. During our excursion  through the woods, we trapped some of the local  mice for examination in a makeshift laboratory .  We were surprised to find that although each  mouse registered unprecedented levels of ra - diation in its bones and muscles, all the animals  seemed physically normal, and many of the fe - males were carrying normal-looking embryos.  This was true for pretty much every creature we  examined—highly radioactive, but physically  normal. It was the first of many revelations.  We have now spent 12 years trying to sort  out the effects of a radioactive environment on  the local wildlife. We have performed a variety  of experiments in the Zone. In one of our earli - est studies, we found that the resident mouse  population did not have any obvious chromo - somal damage. We wondered whether the ab - sence of injury could be explained by some sort  of adaptive change, perhaps a more efficient  DNA -repair mechanism, after many prior gen - erations of exposure to radiation. But when we  transplanted wild mice from uncontaminated regions into cages in the red forest and then  examined their chromosomes, they were like - wise unaffected by the radiation. In at least this  respect, the mice seemed to have a natural “im - munity” to harm from radiation. We repeated  the cage experiments with Big Blue transgenic  mice—which carry a gene that glows “blue” if it  undergoes a mutation—and radiosensitive mice  to look for evidence of chromosome breakage,  genetic aberrations and changes in gene expres - sion. The genetic impacts proved to be subtle  and not likely to threaten the rodent’s repro - ductive success or longevity . We also compared  the genetic variations of populations inside the  Zone with those from relatively uncontaminat - ed areas, and we found no evidence of increased  mutation rates from exposure to radioactivity . It turns out that the nascent field of radioecol - ogy is much more complicated than we had ex - pected. Radioactive fallout from the Chernobyl  accident was not deposited uniformly around  the reactor. Distinct “excursions,” known as the  northern and western traces, carried the ash  in plumes across the countryside and through  the city of Pripyat, a mere 3 kilometers from the  power plant. This produced a mosaic of radio - active habitats that are separated by relatively  unaffected areas. Such heterogeneity makes it  difficult to evaluate the effects on animal popu - lations because animals from “clean” habitats  might migrate into the contaminated areas. The  complexity of the habitats is exacerbated by  the presence of non-radioactive pollutants. Vin - cent Bahryaktor, vice president of the Ukrainian  Academy of Sciences, has said that “Northern  Ukraine is the cleanest part of our country; it has  only radiation.” Unfortunately , this isn’t quite  true. Decades of uncontrolled waste manage - ment have contaminated the region with heavy  metals, petrochemicals and pesticides. Radiation doses have declined precipitously  since the accident—less than 3 percent of the  initial radioactivity remains. Nevertheless, the  Chernobyl Exclusion Zone still offers a unique  outdoor laboratory to examine the fate and the  effects of a radioactive environment. The aban -Growing Up with Chernobyl  Working in a radioactive zone, two scientists learn tough lessons   about politics, bias and the challenges of doing good science Ronald K. Chesser and Robert J. Baker Ronald K. Chesser is a profes - sor of biological sciences and  director of the Center for Envi - ronmental Radiation Studies at  T exas T ech University. Much  of his current research is in  reverse-engineering radioac - tive releases from nuclear ac - cidents. He continues to work  at Chernobyl and is currently  examining radioactive con - tamination and human health  issues surrounding nuclear  facilities near Baghdad, Iraq.  Robert J. Baker is Horn Profes - sor of Biological Sciences and  director of the Natural Sciences  Research Laboratory at T exas  T ech. His research program  evalulates molecular variations  in organisms exposed to Cher - nobyl radiation. He is one of  the world’s leading authorities  on the genetic variation and  phylogenetics of bat species. Ad - dress: Department of Biological  Sciences, T exas T ech University,  Lubbock, T exas 79409–3131.  Internet: ron.chesser@ttu.edu,   robert.baker@ttu.edu 2006    November–December      543 www.americanscientist.org© 2006 Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society. Reproduction  with permission only. Contact perms@amsci.org.doned city of Pripyat is now largely a forest with  buildings poking above the treetops. After the  initial decline of the animal populations, which  were decimated by radioactive fallout, wildlife  is now thriving. The region has become a refuge  for released populations of Przewalski’s horse  and European bison. The population densities of  Russian wild boar are 10 to 15 times greater in the  Zone than in adjacent areas inhabited by people.  Endangered black storks and white-tailed eagles  are also more common in the Zone. The “Exclu - sion Zone” has effectively become a preserve. We were completely taken aback by what  we saw that first summer in Chernobyl, and  we continue to be challenged by what we en - counter in that strangely beautiful environ - ment. Our endeavors have led to some of the  happiest and bleakest moments in our profes - sional lives. We now recognize that we were  terribly naive about radioecology and the poli - tics of scientific research when we first started  this work. But we’ve gained some wisdom  along the way, and here we’d like to share  what we’ve learned from our experiences in  the form of brief lessons. Lesson 1:   Beautiful  theories  are often  destroyed  by ugly  facts. It may be a cliché, but it seems that nearly  everyone must learn this lesson at some point  in their scientific careers. In our case, the beau - tiful theory involved little rodents, voles of  the genus Microtus . We found a great deal of  genetic variation when we first examined the  voles within the Exclusion Zone, and because  the genetic differences were linked to different  sites within the Zone, we naturally assumed  that the variations were caused by diverse  exposures to radiation. To our chagrin, a chro - mosomal analysis revealed that we were ac - tually studying the natural variation of four  species of Microtus , not a single species, as we  had believed. It was evolutionary time, not  mutagenic radiation, that accounted for the  genetic differences we observed. What had promised to be a quick exposé of  the radiation effects from the Chernobyl fallout  proved to be a lesson in taxonomy . It also re - vealed a prejudice we had about the potential ef - fects of radiation. W e caught the error early in our  investigations, but we were still disappointed.  Figure 1. Destruction of the Chernobyl nuclear Power Plant by an explosion in reactor IV on April 26, 1986 released plumes of radioactive  particles across the countryside. The ionizing radiation resulted in a few dozen deaths within a few months, along with cancers implicated in  thousands of premature deaths. More than 135,000 people were evacuated from the zone around the plant, leaving behind the local wildlife.  The long-term effects of a radioactive environment on these inhabitants are still under investigation. The authors discuss some of the difficul - ties of assessing these effects after more than 12 years of research in the region surrounding the defunct nuclear complex.Igor Kostin/Sygma/Corbis 544     American Scientist, Volume 94© 2006 Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society. Reproduction  with permission only. Contact perms@amsci.org.W e hadn’t traveled halfway across the globe and  hiked through radiation-contaminated forests  to conduct studies in species classification, but  that was exactly what we had to do if we were to  move onto the meaningful phase of our work. Lesson 2:  Real  progress  often  requires  a  change  in direction. Before we worked at Chernobyl, our expertise  was limited to evolutionary genetics. Our un -derstanding of radiation dose rates, especially  in rodents, was almost zero. When we entered  Chernobyl, most animal studies assumed that  individuals from the same location would  have similar dose rates and that the rates were  proportional to the animal’s distance from the  source, in this case a damaged reactor. Neither  of these assumptions proved to be correct.  Mice living in the same habitat vary consider - ably in how much radiation they are exposed  to externally from the soils and the vegetation,  and internally from things they have ingested.  Our analyses showed that we must examine  the internal and external doses for each indi - vidual, rather than relying on population aver - ages or the animal’s proximity to the reactor. So we immersed ourselves in the study of  radioisotopes. The predominant radionuclides  remaining in Chernobyl are strontium-90  and cesium-137. These isotopes emit differ - ent amounts of energy, through particles and  photons, so the radiation an animal receives  depends on its relative exposure to these ra - dioisotopes. Also, it turns out that cesium ac - cumulates in muscle and other soft tissues,  whereas strontium is deposited in teeth and  bones. We studied the energies of the particles  and photons emitted by these radioisotopes,  and we learned how to estimate the probabili - ties that these energies will be absorbed by  air, soil and biological tissues. These are non - Figure 2. Two radioactive plumes—the northern and Western T races—skirted the edges of Pripyat, a city in northern Ukraine inhabited by 50,000  people at the time of the accident. It’s been estimated that 4,000 people died of cancer because of direct exposure to the radiation. The death toll  would have been much greater had the prevailing winds directed the plumes through the city. Distribution of the isotope cesium-137 serves as a  marker of radioactive contamination in the Chernobyl exclusion Zone  (map) . Most of the authors’ studies on the local wildlife took place in the  “Red Forest,” named after pine trees that were killed and discolored by the radiation. ( satellite image courtesy of Google/T erraMetrics.)10 kilometers BELARUSRed Forest Chernobyl nuclear power plant Pripyat City Ukraine/Belarus border Exclusion Zone boundaryremediated 1,000 500 200 100 50 20 10 5 1 <1curies per square kilometer UKRAINE Chernobyl reactor IVChernobyl reactor IVPripyat, UkrainePripyat, Ukraine Western TraceNorthern Trace 2006    November–December      545 www.americanscientist.org© 2006 Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society. Reproduction  with permission only. Contact perms@amsci.org.trivial tasks, and even today we are still refin - ing some of the mathematical formulations to  improve our estimates. We failed to anticipate that such intricacies  would force us to become familiar with other  branches of science. Indeed, it’s been said that  science advances so quickly that its practitio - ners must run as hard as they can—like the Red  Queen in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking- Glass —just to stay in the same place. We learned  that sometimes you also have to change your  course just to stay on top of things. Lesson 3:   Don’t  forget  about  history. Animal populations have natural variations  in both gene frequency and physical traits as  a normal product of their evolutionary histo - ries. Populations experience growths, declines,  dispersals and local extinctions that may be  completely independent of the event that is  being investigated—here, an explosive release  of lethal radiation. The trick is to come up  with a way to distinguish the natural variation  from that caused by the agent of interest. This  is difficult because we don’t have samples of  populations in the contaminated zone before  the radiation was released.  One approach is to assume that nearby popu - lations of the same species that have not been  exposed to appreciable amounts of radioactivity  will display levels of variations that are similar to  those that would have been found in the original  population within the contaminated zone before  the accident. We use this approach, but not with - out recognizing its limitations. The “reference”  samples are merely pseudo-controls because we  cannot be sure that we have accounted for all the  factors that might have influenced genetic varia - tion. For example, geographical features—rivers,  forests and farmlands—that differ between the  regions may affect gene frequencies in unexpect - ed ways. Ecotoxicologists must consider these  historical influences if we are to identify the true  effects of a contaminating agent. Lesson 4:   It’s  always  wise  to maintain  some  humility. There’s a broad range of opinions on the biolog - ical consequences of being exposed to the con - taminated environment near Chernobyl. Vari - ous studies on wheat, mice, birds and humans  have concluded that mutation rates are greatly  elevated and that the evolutionary fitness of the  organisms is reduced. Other studies have failed  to find any increase in the rate of genetic muta - tions or any evidence that the survival of the  animals living near Chernobyl differs from that  of those living in clean environments.  We have spent a considerable amount of time  trying to understand how applications of the  scientific method can produce results that are  so contradictory . We could offer a few explana - tions, including the possibility that some studies simply lack the data to justify the authors’ con - clusions, but it might be best to offer an example  from our own experiences of tasting humble  pie. (We should add that human error may not  explain all the differences between the studies.) The April 25, 1996 issue of Nature  featured on  its cover our article concluding that voles living  in the Chernobyl environment had an elevated  rate of genetic mutation. Our experimental de - sign included double-blind analyses of DNA  sequences, the long strings of nucleotides that  make up the genetic code. We had determined  the genetic sequences manually , a process which  involves laborious alignments of genes and even  a few judgment calls. Nevertheless, we were  confident in our results.  Figure 3. Pripyat, now abandoned, lies a mere 3 kilometers from the Chernobyl nucle- ar Complex, which is visible on the horizon. Brenda Rodgers of T exas T ech University  and author Chesser measured the radiation levels of every building in Pripyat, and the  city is now the basis of a digital, three-dimensional reconstruction that models the flow  of radiation in urban environments. (Photograph courtesy of the authors.) Figure 4. The Red Forest was bathed in the ionizing radiation of the Western Trace,  which passed through the region in the wake of the accident at reactor IV . Pine trees  were killed by the plume, but birches survived. Wildlife now thrives in the area.  (Photograph courtesy of the authors.) 546     American Scientist, Volume 94© 2006 Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society. Reproduction  with permission only. Contact perms@amsci.org.Soon after the paper was published, we ac - quired an automated sequencer that was more  accurate than the manual methods used to se - quence DNA. We had archived the tissues from  all the animals used in our Nature  study , so we  decided to re-sequence the genes to compare  the methods. To our horror, the automated se - quencer failed to replicate the result we reported  in Nature . The more accurate method failed to  find an elevated mutation rate, even though we  repeated the sequencing several times. We agonized over our options for a few  weeks while we were on an expedition to an - other radioactive site in Chelyabinsk, Russia.  After we returned, we knew we had to retract  our report. Not all of our seven coauthors  agreed. Some thought that we should allow  the paper to fade from public scrutiny . Another  suggested that our future work would eluci - date the true mutation rate. However, Nature  is  a publication with a high profile, and our origi - nal report may well attract more attention than  potential reports in other publications. In the  end, we all agreed that we had an obligation to  the scientific community to come clean, and we  published a brief retraction in the November 6, 1997 issue of Nature . It was an important lesson  in admitting error and coming to terms with  our mistakes. Lesson 5:   Scientists  must  have  a single  agenda:  the truth. One day a graduate student brought her labo - ratory notebook to one of our group meetings.  She looked at us, almost in tears, and blurted,  “I couldn’t find any differences between the  experimentals and the controls. What did I do  wrong?” We were grateful for her honesty . Our  retraction of the Nature  paper had shown us  that problems in quality control can arise even  with the best intentions. Our scrutiny of the  published literature reveals that many scientists  are less than careful about such matters. Professors, graduate students and techni - cians all have preconceived ideas of where  their data may lead them. We recognized that  we weren’t immune to such prejudices either,  so we had to find a way to prevent our bi - ases from influencing our results. The best ap - proach is a blind analysis, with no knowledge  of whether the samples come from the experi - mental or the control groups. (We now have  inhalation of airborne particles ingestion of food and particles beta particles gamma raysairborne particles egestion and urinationsoil and vegetationexternal exposure internal exposure Figure 5. Mice brought into the Red Forest from uncontaminated regions serve  as experimental models to ascertain the effects of a radioactive environment. The  animals are exposed to radioactive particles, primarily cesium-137 and strontium- 90 (purple  and yellow  dots),  in the contaminated forest from internal and external  sources. some of the ionizing radiation (gamma rays and beta particles) is not  absorbed by the animal, and some of the particles are excreted. each mouse wears  a collar (photograph),  which contains dosimeters that absorb radiation at the same  rate as soft biological tissues. The collar provides an accurate measure of the radia - tion dose the animal receives from outside sources. such experiments reveal that  the mice appear unaffected by the residual radiation in the Chernobyl environ - ment. (Photograph courtesy of the authors.) 2006    November–December      547 www.americanscientist.org© 2006 Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society. Reproduction  with permission only. Contact perms@amsci.org.a secretary codify all the sample tubes.) After  we complete the analysis, we then decode and  classify our data.  Right or wrong, at least we know that the  results were not affected by our personal prej - udices. A scientist should always be ready to  change his mind. Once a scientist resists alterna - tive explanations, he is no longer a useful deci - sion maker. Blind studies are the antithesis of  blind ambition.  Lesson 6:   Incredible  results  require  incredible  evidence. Some reports on the biological impacts of the  fallout from Chernobyl seem to lie outside the  bounds of reasonable expectations. One study  reported that barn swallows, collected from  northern Ukraine, were experiencing partial al - binism and increased germline mutation rates,  with a concomitant loss of evolutionary fitness.  Unfortunately , the authors did not identify ex - actly where the birds were collected, they did  not evaluate the radiation doses to the birds and  they provided little information on the level of  soil contamination. In contrast, our own inves - tigations of swallows collected in a 10-kilometer  zone surrounding the reactor reveals that the  internal radiation doses are negligible—less  than 10 microsieverts per day . That dose rate  is less than one-tenth of a typical chest x ray ,  or about the same for three hours of flight at  35,000 feet. It would be astonishing if that dose were responsible for the elevated mutation rates  reported by the authors.  It’s also the case that local genetic variations  are common in natural animal populations. It  would be surprising to find populations with - out geographic variations. The authors of the  barn-swallow article inferred that the variation  among the birds was the result of radiation-in - duced mutations, but they did not provide any  evidence for their assertion. They did not elimi - nate the possibility that the geographic varia - tions were natural, or that the mutations might  have been caused by something else. Moreover,  some of the same barn-swallow variants have  been found in regions not affected by Chernob - yl, suggesting that they may not be uncommon.  In our opinion, their incredible conclusions were  supported only by circumstantial evidence. Lesson 7:   A good  idea doesn’t  always  attract  funding. Chernobyl is known the world over as the  worst nuclear power plant disaster in history .  We naively assumed that this name recognition,  and a good scientific plan, would quickly yield  financial support for our research. On one of  our funding forays to Washington we present - ed what we thought was a well-designed plan  on the scientific merits of our proposed research  at Chernobyl. Afterward, one of the politicians  said, “Okay , that was fine ... now, how do I sell  this to my fellow congressmen?” We exchanged  Figure 6. Wildlife flourishes in the Chernobyl exclusion Zone. Many species are more plentiful in the exclusion Zone than they are in neigh - boring habitats (clockwise  from  upper  left: red fox, nesting  Northern  shrikes,  elk and Russian  wild  boar).  (Photographs courtesy of the authors.) 548     American Scientist, Volume 94© 2006 Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society. Reproduction  with permission only. Contact perms@amsci.org.glances with each other that said, “didn’t we  just answer that question?” Later we realized that we hadn’t provided  him with anything useful for his agenda. Good  science is a beautiful thing, but it must fit within  an existing framework of policy and strategic  plans or it will be very difficult to finance. Our  great scientific proposal floated away like a he - lium-filled balloon with no string tying it down  to political reality .  Policy makers want concrete conclusions and  results, not probability estimates on the relative  dangers of radiation exposure, which turns out  to be less hazardous than generally believed. Many public servants do not share the scientist’s  enthusiasm for the scientific process. They make  laws that distinguish right from wrong, while we  spend 95 percent of our time trying to explain 5  percent of the variation of a phenomenon. Ultimately, we were successful in securing  funds for several years of research, and we have  since built the International Radioecology Labo - ratory in Slavutych, Ukraine. But it hasn’t been  easy, and most prospects for future funding  look bleak. Lesson 8:   Be prepared  to be unpopular  and uncomfortable. In this year’s 20th-anniversary reports on the  Chernobyl accident, news outlets various - ly claimed that the disaster had resulted in  93,500, 70,000, 4,000, hundreds or just 31 hu - man deaths. We couldn’t find a single story  that tried to explain the enormous difficulties  of determining an accurate number for the  excess cancer deaths caused by the radiation  fallout from Chernobyl. The press did not at - tempt to explain the differences in opinions  between scientists or the contradictory results  of research on animals exposed to radiation.  Instead, advocacy groups pointed their fingers  at scientists and asked why they were trying  to cover up the “real” impact of radiation on  people and the environment.  Scientists often find themselves in unpopular  and uncomfortable positions. That’s just part  of the job when you have to report the truth.  A scientist’s conclusions help to guide public  policy , write regulations and develop new tech - nologies. The results of good science are simply  Figure 7. some people have returned to the Chernobyl exclusion Zone, hoping to  reclaim the land and livelihoods they lost to the accident in 1986. scientists continue  to monitor the environment. Viktor Drachev/AFP/Getty Images 548     American Scientist, Volume 94Research on the effects of radiation should be held to  the highest scientific standards. In our opinion, the  standards have been lax. Many of the studies showing  an elevated rate of mutations among the animals in the  Chernobyl environment need to be replicated, often with  improved experimental designs. Funding agencies should  encourage independent laboratories to undertake simulta - neous studies of the same samples.  We would be negligent in our mission to improve the re - search at Chernobyl if we did not also provide some positive  recommendations for future investigations. Here we offer a  short list of the minimum requirements necessary for a valid  study of the consequences of environmental radioactivity . 1. Investigators should archive tissue, DNA and any other  material that would permit other scientists to replicate their  results. Archiving would also allow scientists to employ other  experimental designs to corroborate, refute or enhance the  results. To that end, we have archived over 3,000 specimens  from mammals native to Chernobyl and the surrounding  areas at the Museum of Texas Tech University . We have also  archived tissue from laboratory mice with recombinant DNA  (Big Blue), and mice exposed to low-dose radiation. These  samples allow scientists to confirm our results, and the tissue can be used to identify biomarkers that can resolve the effects  of radiation. Scientists interested in obtaining tissue or bor - rowing samples from the Chernobyl region may contact us by  e-mail: robert.baker@ttu.edu 2. Samples should be analyzed using double-blind ex - perimental methods. This removes any suspicion that an  investigator’s bias may be affecting the results. 3. Radiation levels and expected dose rates from external  sources in an animal’s normal activity area should be identi - fied for all known radionuclides. There is too much variation  in radiation levels to assign dose rates for an animal based on  a few measures from soil samples.  4. Investigators need to acquire accurate measures of an  animal’s dose rate from inhaled or ingested radionuclides.  Dose rates from internal sources are often higher than those  from the outside. If dose rates are unknown, then measures of  radioactivity in tissues will suffice. 5. The provenance of a sample must be provided. Other  scientists should have the opportunity to collect samples from  the same location. 6. Scientists should report positive and negative results.  The omission of negative results gives the impression that the  effects of radiation are ubiquitous. Setting Standards for Radioecology 2006    November–December      549 www.americanscientist.org© 2006 Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society. Reproduction  with permission only. Contact perms@amsci.org.too important to be swayed by emotional ap - peals. Unfortunately, poor science often gets  great publicity , especially if it stirs controversy  or implies that governments are recklessly en - dangering the lives of their citizens. In the long  run, poor science will beget poor policy . Lessons for science Twenty years have passed since the accident at  Chernobyl, yet the extent to which people, ani - mals and the environment have been harmed  is hotly debated. The conflicting reports on the  genetic and biological impacts of environmental  radiation make it difficult for even the most  seasoned scientist to make sense of all the data.  Remarkably , there is still no accurate account  of the number of deaths or birth defects caused  by the disaster. Investigations into the effects of  ionizing radiation on living organisms should  be based on sound scientific principles for the  simple reason that risk assessments, regulatory  statutes and the effectiveness of remediation  measures are often based on these reports. The  public and scientific communities need to recog - nize that ecological studies on Chernobyl that do  not include accurate information on animal ex - posure do not qualify as radiological research. The proper null hypothesis should be that  the effects of the Chernobyl environment on  an organism do not differ from effects outside  the environment. Falsification of the null hy - pothesis has profound implications for society .  If there is an elevated mutation rate and loss of  health, then appropriate measures should be  taken to protect ourselves. No one would argue  with that. But we must be mindful that the costs  of over-regulation can be extreme. Zbigniew  Jaworowski, former chairman of the United  Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of  Atomic Radiation, has estimated that enforcing  the radiation-safety regulations in the U.S. costs  about three billion dollars for each life saved  from accidental exposure. By comparison, the  measles vaccine costs $99 per life saved. We believe the problem requires a coordinat - ed effort that enforces standards of data gather - ing and assessment. This effort would establish  protocols for collegial verification of results and  preserve samples for future studies. Without  such coordination, we will fritter away meager  resources on disconnected and unrepeatable  studies. We should endeavor now, while the sig - natures of released radiation remain on the land - scape and in the affected organisms, to solve the  issues of environmental health and safety . Bibliography Baker, R. J., R. A. Van Den Bussche, A. J. Wright, L. E.  Wiggins, M. J. Hamilton, E. P . Reat, M. H. Smith, M. D.  Lomakin and R. Chesser. 1996. High levels of genetic  change in rodents of Chernobyl. Nature  380:707–708. Baker, R. J., R. A. Van Den Bussche, A. J. Wright, L. E.  Wiggins, M. J. Hamilton, E. P. Reat, M. H. Smith,  M. D. Lomakin and R. Chesser. 1997. Retraction. High levels of genetic change in rodents of Cher - nobyl. Nature  390:100. Baker, R. J., and R. K. Chesser. 2000. The Chornobyl  nuclear disaster and subsequent creation of a wild - life preserve. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  19:1231–1232 . Baker, R. J., A. M. Bickham, M. Bondarkov, S. P . Gas - chak, C. W. Matson, B. E. Rodgers, J. K. Wickliffe and  R. K. Chesser. 2001. Consequences of polluted en - vironments on population structure: The bank vole  (Clethrionomys glareolus ) at Chornobyl. Ecotoxicology   10:211–216. Chesser, R. K., and R. J. Baker. 1996 . Life continues at  Chernobyl. La Recherche  286:30–31. Chesser, R. K., D. W. Sugg, A. J. DeWoody, C. H. Jagoe,  M. H. Smith, M. D. Lomakin, R. A. Van Den Bussche,  C. E. Dallas, K. Holloman, F. W. Whicker, S. P . Gas - chak, I. V . Chizhevsky, V . V . Lyabik, E. G. Buntova  and R. J. Baker. 2000. Concentrations and dose rate  estimates of 134,  137cesium and 90strontium in small  mammals at Chornobyl, Ukraine. Environmental Toxi - cology and Chemistry 19:305–312. Chesser, R. K., M. Bondarkov , R. J. Baker, J. K. Wickliffe  and B. E. Rodgers. 2004. Reconstruction of radioactive  plume characteristics along Chernobyl’s western trace.  Journal of Environmental Radioactivity  71:147–157. Chesser, R. K., B. E. Rodgers, J. K. Wickliffe, S. Gaschak,  I. Chizhevsky, C. J. Phillips and R. J. Baker. 2001. Ac - cumulation of 137cesium and 90strontium from abiotic  and biotic sources in rodents at Chornobyl, Ukraine.  Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  20:1927–1935. Dubrova, Y. E., V . N. Nesterov, N. G. Krouchinsky, V . A.  Ostapenko, R. Neumann, D. L. Nell and A. J. Jeffreys.  1996. Human minisatellite mutation rate after the  Chernobyl accident. Nature  380:683–686. Ellegren, H., G. Lindgren, C. R. Primmer and A.P.  Møller. 1997. Fitness loss and germline mutations  in barn swallows breeding in Chernobyl. Nature   389:593–596. Goncharova, R. I., and N. I. Ryabokon. 1995. Dynamics  of cytogenetic injuries in natural populations of bank  vole in the republic of Belarus. Radiation Protection  Dosimetry  62:37–40. Jacob, P .,  et al . 1998. Thyroid cancer risk to children cal - culated. Nature  392:31–32.  Jaworowski, Z. 1995. Beneficial radiation. Nukleonika   40:3–12. Kovalchuk, O., Y. E. Dubrova, A. Arkhipov, B. Hohn  and I. Kovalchuk. 2000. Wheat mutation rate after  Chernobyl. Nature  407:583. Medvedev, Z. A. 1994. Chernobyl: Eight years after.  Trends in Ecology & Evolution  9:369–371. Meeks, H. N., J. K. Wickliffe, S. R. Hoofer, R. K. Chesser,  B. E. Rodgers and R. J. Baker. Accepted. Evidence  that variation in the mitochondrial control region  is not related to radiation exposure. Environmental  Toxicology and Chemistry. Rodgers, B. E., R. K. Chesser, J. K. Wickliffe, C. J. Phillips  and R. J. Baker. 2001. Sub-chronic exposure of BALB  and C57BL strains of Mus musculus to the radioactive  environment of the Chornobyl exclusion zone. Envi - ronmental Toxicology and Chemistry  20:2830–2835. Rodgers, B. E., J. K. Wickliffe, C. J. Phillips, R. K. Chesser  and R. J. Baker. 2001. Experimental exposure of naïve  bank voles, Clethrionomys glareolus , to the Chornobyl,  Ukraine, environment: A test of radioresistance. Envi - ronmental Toxicology and Chemistry  20:1936–1941. Wickliffe, J. K., B. E. Rodgers, R. K. Chesser, C. J. Phil - lips, S. P . Gaschak and R. J. Baker. In press. Mito - chondrial DNA heteroplasmy in laboratory mice ex - perimentally enclosed in the radioactive Chornobyl  environment. Radiation Research .For relevant Web links,  consult this issue of  American Scientist  Online : http://www.american   scientist.org/   IssueTOC/issue/902