 Quantifying Search Bias: Investigating Sources of Bias for Political Searches in Social Media Juhi Kulshrestha MPI-SWS, GermanyMotahhare Eslami University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USAJohnnatan Messias MPI-SWS, Germany Muhammad Bilal Zafar MPI-SWS, GermanySaptarshi Ghosh IIEST Shibpur, IndiaKrishna P. Gummadi MPI-SWS, Germany Karrie Karahalios University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA Adobe Research, USA ABSTRACT Search systems in online social media sites are frequently used to ﬁnd information about ongoing events and people. For topics with multiple competing perspectives, such as po- litical events or political candidates, bias in the top ranked re- sults signiﬁcantly shapes public opinion. However, bias does not emerge from an algorithm alone. It is important to distin- guish between the bias that arises from the data that serves as the input to the ranking system and the bias that arises from the ranking system itself. In this paper, we propose a frame- work to quantify these distinct biases and apply this frame- work to politics-related queries on Twitter. We found that both the input data and the ranking system contribute signiﬁ- cantly to produce varying amounts of bias in the search results and in different ways. We discuss the consequences of these biases and possible mechanisms to signal this bias in social media search systems’ interfaces. ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H.1.2 User / Machine Systems: Human information process- ing; H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval: Search process; H.3.5 On-line Information Services: Web-based services Author Keywords Search Bias; Search Bias Quantiﬁcation; Sources of Search Bias; Social Media Search; Political Bias Inference; Twitter; INTRODUCTION As algorithmic decision making systems pervade our daily lives, there is a growing concern about their lack of trans- parency and their potential for offering biased or discrimina- tory results to their users [10]. Search engines are one of these Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. CSCW ’17, February 25-March 01, 2017, Portland, OR, USA c 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4335-0/17/03. . . $15.00 DOI:http://dx:doi:org/10:1145/2998181:2998321systems that users rely on for a variety of daily tasks from lo- cating speciﬁc websites or content to learning broadly about events, people, or businesses unfamiliar to them. When a user is trying to “learn” or gather information about a topic [45], search engines could inﬂuence the user’s opinions about the topic by preferentially ranking results that correspond to one particular perspective on the topic above others. This possi- bility is particularly troubling in the context of informational queries about polarizing topics like political debates or politi- cians, where contrasting perspectives exist. Recently con- ducted ﬁeld studies have shown that not only do users place greater trust in higher ranked search results [29], but also that user opinions about political candidates can be manipulated by biased rankings of search results [8]. Characterizing the bias present in a search system can be quite challenging. Search engines employ a ranking system to re- trieve a list of results from a corpus of data (i.e., collection of web pages or user posts like tweets) based on their relevance to a user’s query. So, when quantifying the bias of a search engine in response to a query, it is useful to distinguish (i) the bias that arises from the data corpus that acts as input to the ranking system of the search engine, from (ii) the bias that arises from the ranking system itself. In this paper, we shed light on these challenges by answering the following research questions: RQ1: How can we quantify the different sources of search engine bias? RQ2: How biased are the search results for political topics on social media sites like Twitter? Where does this bias in the search results come from? We address these questions for political queries related to the 2016 US Presidential primaries using Twitter Search. We chose a social media search engine because people are in- creasingly relying on social media for their news. In re- cent elections, it has become common for people to search for information about political candidates and events on so- cial media sites [40]. Furthermore, in August 2015, the Pew Research Center announced that approximately two thirds Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 417 of American adults received their news from Twitter—and they continued to follow news threads on Twitter as they pro- gressed [25]. To answer our ﬁrst question, we ﬁrst propose a search bias quantiﬁcation framework that quantiﬁes the bias of the out- put results of a search engine. Moreover, this framework also discerns to what extent this output bias is due to the input data set that feeds into the ranking system and how much is due to the bias introduced by the ranking system. Our frame- work requires a methodology for inferring political bias of individual search results. Hence, we also developed a method to infer the political bias of individual data items on Twitter with high accuracy and coverage. To address the second question, we gathered data for 25 po- litical queries in Twitter search in December 2015 during a week in which two presidential debates occurred—one Re- publican debate and one Democratic debate. Applying our quantiﬁcation method on the collected data, we found that both the input data and the ranking system contribute signif- icantly in producing the bias in the resulting Twitter search results. For example, while the Twitter stream containing our selected queries (the input data) contributed to the output data by adding a democratic bias on average, the ranking system shifted or in some cases altered the polarity of this bias, re- sulting in a substantially different political bias in the ﬁnal search results. This collective contribution of the input data and the ranking system in producing the output bias can noticeably affect a user’s search experience. We observed, for instance, that the Twitter input data stream for the most popular candidates in a party were more biased towards the opposing political per- spective. However, the manner in which the ranking system altered the input to produce the output, and therefore its bias, was different for the popular candidates from each political party. While the ranking system mitigated the opposing bias in the search results for the most popular democratic candi- date, it enhanced it for the most popular republican candidate. Simply put, if a user searches for the most popular republican candidate, she will get more tweets from the opposing politi- cal party than if she searched for the most popular democratic candidate. This may be less than desirable for a popular re- publican candidate if the users with the opposing polarity pri- marily post negative tweets about the candidate that result in negatively biased search results for her or him. Additionally, we also observed that differently phrased but similar queries (referring to the same debate event) can yield signiﬁcantly different biases. Lastly, we call for raising the awareness of search engine users by signaling the bias in the search results. We brieﬂy discuss two possible solutions of either incorporating the bias in the ranking systems itself or incorporating it in search en- gine designs by making the bias in the search results transpar- ent to users.RELATED WORK Bias in Web Search In recent years, there has been a growing interest in study- ing the bias in Web search engines results [11, 26, 39, 41, 42]. Much of this work has been motivated by the concern that dominant search engines like Google might favor certain websites over others when ranking relevant search results. For example, Google might preferentially rank videos from YouTube (owned by Google) over videos from competing sites. Whereas, exploring geographical bias, [42] measured whether sites from certain countries are covered more than sites from other countries in search results. Several studies have explored political bias in Web search re- sults and search queries. While Weber et al [43] inferred po- litical leanings of search queries by linking the queries with political blogs, Epstein and Robertson [8] studied how bias in search rankings can inﬂuence people’s candidate selection in elections. They asked people unaware of the political can- didates in an election to search for the candidates and form an opinion based on the results. By biasing the search re- sults in a controlled manner, they showed that search rankings could impact their voting preferences in an election by 20% or more. Their observations demonstrate the potential impact of search results on the political opinion of users, and thus provide the motivation for our present study. A complementary line of work has studied the differences or biases in Web search results due to personalization, i.e., the differences in the results seen by different users for the same query. [14, 18] studied differences in search results due to the geo-location of users. [19] studied how the information- seeking behavior of users changes due to a major event such as a shooting incident, and found that most people use search engines to access information that they agree with. These studies are performed from the viewpoint of particular users, whereas the present work shows that political biases exist even in non-personalized search results in the context of so- cial media. Measuring Political Bias on Social Media While there have been prior attempts to infer the political bias of textual content in online forums, such as blogs and news articles [1, 46, 51] or hashtags on Twitter [44], to our knowl- edge, no work has measured the political bias of a tweet based on its textual content, particularly due to its very small size. Instead, many previous studies have tried to infer the bias of a tweet’s source (the user who posted it), by modeling the language usage of the users from different political polari- ties [23, 32] or by leveraging the social links that a user has with other Twitter users with known biases [6,13]. Conover et al.[5] inferred the political alignment of Twitter users, based on the tweets or hashtags posted by the users, as well as the community structure of diffusion networks (via retweets) of political information, observing that the mechanism relying on social network performs better. In [50], the authors auto- matically measure the impartiality of the social media posts based on how discernible the afﬁliation of the author is. Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 418 While all the aforementioned studies try to infer a Twitter user’s bias, they rely on the assumption that the political lean- ing of a user is explicit in either her language or her social network. This may not be the case with many users who ei- ther do not post political content frequently or do not connect to other political users directly, but might still have political leanings. To account for this constraint, we build upon these prior studies to propose a new methodology to infer the bias of a user by including other factors correlated with the politi- cal afﬁliation of a user, namely her interests. Cross-Ideological Interactions on Social Media With the rising popularity of social media sites like Twit- ter and Facebook, users are increasingly relying on them to obtain news [21], real-time information about ongoing events and public opinion on celebrities [40]. While some researchers envisaged increased democratization through so- cial media usage, with higher engagement between users who do not share the same political ideology [35], some others argued that social media usage can result in selective ex- posure by providing a platform that reinforces users’ exist- ing biases [22]. By examining cross-ideological exposure through content and network analysis, [17] showed that polit- ical talk on Twitter is highly partisan and users are unlikely to be exposed to cross-ideological content through their friend- ship network. Other studies have also conﬁrmed these results by demonstrating users’ higher willingness to communicate with other like-minded social media users [22, 37] and their inability to engage in meaningful discussions with different- minded users [47] . To understand the political bias in social media better, many researchers have studied political polarization on Twitter through analyzing different groups’ behavior. [6] showed that Twitter users usually retweet the users who have the same po- litical ideology as themselves, making the retweeting network structure highly partitioned into left- and right-leaning groups with limited connections between them. Liao et al. [20] inves- tigated political polarization in the context of a majority and minority group on a political topic (pro-snowden vs. anti- snowden), ﬁnding that while the Twitter population is more likely to be pro-snowden, the minority group (anti-snowden) uses some features of the biased environment such as retweet- ing to mitigate this existing bias. Instead of studying the interactions between cross-ideological users, our current study explores the problem of measuring political bias of social media search engine and unpacking the sources of bias. While many studies have shown the existence of political bias in social media, to our knowledge none have characterized the sources of this bias. Little is known about how much bias is inherent in the data and whether and how the search system enhances or mitigates this bias. Our study tries to shed light on these questions through investigating the sources of political bias in the context of 2016 US presidential election on Twitter. Auditing Algorithms Today, algorithms that curate and present information in on- line platforms can affect users’ experiences signiﬁcantly –fi1(s1), i2(s2), i3(s3), i4(s4), i5(s5)g (set) Input (Relevant items)Ranking Systemi2(s2), i4(s4), i5(s5), i1(s1), i3(s3) (ranked list) Output (Ranked items) Figure 1: Overview of our search bias quantiﬁcation framework. For a given query q, a set of data items relevant to the query is ﬁrst selected. Each individual data item (e.g., i1,i2) has some bias (e.g., s1,s2). Then this set of relevant items is input to the ranking system which produces a ranked list of the items. We deﬁne metrics for capturing the bias in the set of relevant items input to the ranking system (input bias), and in the ranked list output by the ranking system (output bias). creating discriminatory ads based on gender [7] or race [38], showing different prices for the same products/services to dif- ferent users [15] and mistakenly labeling a black man as an ape by an image tagging algorithm [16] – are some such ex- amples. These issues have lead researchers, organizations and even governments towards a new avenue of research called “auditing algorithms”, which endeavors to understand if and how an algorithmic system can cause biases, particularly when they are misleading or discriminatory to users [10, 34]. Besides the algorithm design, biased input data to an algo- rithm can also result in a biased output. This insight is par- ticularly crucial in this digital era where many algorithms are trained using huge amounts of data [2]. Therefore, distin- guishing whether a bias in an algorithmic system’s output is caused by its input or the algorithm itself, is of prime impor- tance. This work is a ﬁrst step towards tackling this challenge in the area of search systems. RQ1: QUANTIFYING SEARCH ENGINE BIAS This section focuses on our ﬁrst research question – the quan- tiﬁcation of search bias. In this paper, we quantify the search bias for the Twitter social media search engine in the context of the US political scenario, where there are two main politi- cal parties: the Democratic party and the Republican party. We ﬁrst propose a framework to capture the different stages of a search process and then discuss metrics to measure the biases at each stage (RQ1a). This framework requires a methodology for inferring the bias of individual search items, and later in the section we present such a methodology in the context of Twitter search (RQ1b). RQ1a: Search Engine Bias Quantiﬁcation Framework Figure 1 gives an intuitive illustration of the main stages of retrieving information via an algorithmic search system. The search system retrieves information from a corpus of data items. Each of these data items has a bias associated with it, given by the bias score s(computed as described in the Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 419 Rankr Bias till rank r Value 1 B(q;1) s2 2 B(q;2)1 2(s2+s4) 3 B(q;3)1 3(s2+s4+s5) 4 B(q;4)1 4(s2+s4+s5+s1) 5 B(q;5)1 5(s2+s4+s5+s1+s3) Output bias at rank 51 5[s2(1 +1 2+1 3+1 4+1 5) + s4(1 2+1 3+1 4+1 5) + s5(1 3+1 4+1 5) + s1(1 4+1 5) + s3(1 5)] Table 1: Explaining the bias metrics with reference to Figure 1. next section: RQ1b). When a user submits a search query, a set of data items that is relevant to the query is ﬁrst retrieved (selected out of all data items in the entire corpus). Then, the set of retrieved relevant items constitutes the input data to the ranking system which produces a ranked list of the relevant items, and this ranked list is shown to the user as the search output.1The users generally give much more attention and importance to the top-ranked items in the list than the lower- ranked items [24]. In the case of Twitter search engine, the data corpus com- prises of the set of all tweets. When a query like ‘Bernie Sanders’ is issued to Twitter search, all the tweets contain- ing ‘Bernie Sanders’ are selected as relevant items. This set of relevant tweets serves as the input to the ranking system, which orders them to output a ranked list of tweets which are displayed to the user. In our framework, we quantify three different biases for a search system, in terms of the biases of the individual data items: (i) input bias: the bias in the set of retrieved items relevant to the query (ﬁltered out of the whole corpus), that serves as the input data to the ranking system, (ii) ranking bias: the bias introduced by the ranking system, and (iii) out- put bias: the cumulative bias in the ranked list output by the search system. In the remainder of the section, we discuss the metrics we use to quantify these biases for Twitter search in the context of US politics. Bias of an individual data item: As mentioned earlier, the search scenario that we are considering is one of the US pol- itics, where there are mainly two political parties. Each data item (i.e., a tweet) can be positively biased (i.e., supporting) or negatively biased (i.e., opposing) or neutral towards each of these two parties, and the bias score of each item (indi- cated by siin Figure 1) captures the degree to which the item is biased with respect to the two parties. In the next section (RQ1b), we describe a methodology for measuring the bias score of items in the context of US political searches on Twit- ter social media. 1The framework can also be generalized to modern-day IR systems which perform retrieval and ranking together, such as systems using topic modeling. We comment on this issue in the Discussion section.We next deﬁne metrics for the input bias, output bias and ranking bias, in terms of the bias scores of the individual data items. Input Bias: When a user issues a query to the search sys- tem, a set of items that are relevant to the query is selected out of the whole corpus, and provided as input to the ranking system. This input data captures the bias introduced by the query by ﬁltering the relevant items from the whole corpus of data. Therefore, we measure the input bias for a query as the aggregate bias of all items relevant to the query, that become the input to the ranking system. Put differently, input bias gives a measure of what bias a user would have observed, had she been shown random items relevant to the query, instead of a list ranked by the ranking system. Speciﬁcally, the Input Bias IB(q)for query qis the average bias of all ndata items that are relevant to q IB(q) =Pn i=1si n(1) where the summation is over all the bias scores (s i) of the n data items found relevant to q. For instance, for the query q shown in Figure 1, the input bias is simply IB(q) =1 5(s1+ s2+s3+s4+s5). Output Bias: The output bias is the effective bias presented to the user (who issued the search query) via the ﬁnal ranked list from the search engine. While quantifying search bias, it must be noted that, whereas the input bias was for an un- ordered set of items, the output search bias is to be measured over a ranked list. The higher ranked items should be given more importance, since not only are the users more likely to browse through the top search results [24], but they also tend to have more trust in them [29]. Hence, we propose a met- ric for output search bias, that is inspired by the well-known metric Average Precision [24] from the Information Retrieval literature. For a given search query q, we ﬁrst deﬁne the bias till a par- ticular rank rin the ranked results (i.e., the aggregate bias of the top rresults). The bias B(q; r)till rank rof the output ranked list is deﬁned as B(q; r) =Pr i=1si r(2) where the summation is over the top ritems in the ranked list. For instance, with respect to the situation shown in Fig. 1, Table 1 (ﬁrst ﬁve rows) shows the bias till ranks 1, 2, ..., 5. Next, we extend the above deﬁnition to deﬁne the Output Search Bias OB(q; r)for the query qat rank r. OB(q; r) =Pr i=1B(q; i) r(3) For instance, the last row of Table 1 computes OB(q; r) at rank r= 5 with respect to the situation shown in Fig- ure 1. Note that the bias score s2of the top-ranked item i2is given the highest weight, followed by the bias score s4of the second-ranked item i4, and so on. This follows the intuition Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 420 that bias in the higher ranked items are likely to inﬂuence the user more than bias in the lower ranked items.2 Ranking Bias: The ranking bias is intended to capture the additional bias introduced by the ranking system, over the bias that was already present in the set of relevant items (i.e., relevant to q) input to the ranking system. If possible, ranking bias could be measured by auditing the exact ranking system being deployed by the search engines. However, for any com- mercial search engine deployed in the real-world, it is infeasi- ble to know the internal details of the ranking system. Hence, we view the ranking system as a ‘black box’ where we only observe the inputs and outputs. Thus, we deﬁne the Ranking Bias RB(q; r)for the query q as simply the difference between the output bias and the input bias for q(as deﬁned earlier). RB(q; r) =OB(q; r) IB(q) (4) Time-Averaged Bias: To capture the overall trend in the bias, we collect multiple snapshots of search results, compute the different bias metrics for each snapshot, and then compute the time-averaged values of the aforementioned metrics. For instance we compute the time-averaged output search bias TOB (q; r)as the average of the OB(q; r)(given by Equa- tion 3) values measured at various instants of time. Similarly, we deﬁne TIB(q)andTRB (q; r)as the time-averaged input bias and time-averaged ranking bias for query qrespectively. RQ1b: Measuring the Political Bias of an Individual Twit- ter Search Result For applying our search bias quantiﬁcation framework to Twitter search in our chosen context of US politics, we re- quire an automated method for inferring the political bias of an individual Twitter search result – a tweet. To measure the bias of a tweet, we have two options (i) we can measure the source bias, i.e. the bias of the author of the tweet, or (ii) we can measure the content bias, i.e., the bias of the content of the tweet. Especially, since the content of the tweet is quite short (only 140 characters), attempting to judge the bias from the short content may not always be accurate; therefore, in this paper we choose to use the source bias to measure the political bias of an individual Twitter search result. In the rest of this section, we start by present our methodology for inferring source bias of a tweet and then evaluate how well it works. Finally, we end with a brief analysis of how well the source bias and content bias match each other in practice in the context of political search queries. Source Bias - Inferring Political Bias of Twitter Users It has been reported that people’s political afﬁliation is corre- lated with their various attributes.3In this work, we leverage this insight to infer political afﬁliations of users on Twitter 2In case the bias score of a particular item in the ranked list cannot be inferred, this item can be ignored and the rankings can be re- computed. This is similar to how missing relevance judgements are handled in the Information Retrieval literature [48]. 3http://2012election:procon:org/ view:resource:php?resourceID=004818based on their interests. Our methodology for inferring the political bias of a given Twitter user uis based on the follow- ing steps – (i) generating two representative sets of users who areknown to have a democratic or republican bias, (ii) infer- ring the topical interests of u, and (iii) examining how closely u’s interests match with the interests of the representative sets of democratic and republican users. Generating representative sets of democratic and repub- lican users: The ﬁrst step in our methodology involves get- ting representative sets of democratic and republican users. One option would be to collect a dataset of users who re- port their political afﬁliations on Twitter. However, such a dataset would suffer from self-reportage problem, while also being biased towards the group of users who have self re- ported. Instead, we use the methodology in [12, 36], which infers the topical attributes of a user vby mining the Twitter Lists that other users have included vin. Thus, we rely on what other people are reporting about a user, and not what she is identifying herself as. Using this method, we extracted a seed set 865 users who have been labelled with the topic ‘democrats’ and a seed set of 1,348 users labelled with the topic ‘republicans’. These seed sets of users include politi- cians (e.g., Steny Hoyer, Matt Blunt), political organizations (e.g., DCCC, Homer Lkprt Tea-party) as well as regular users. Inferring topical interests of a user: After obtaining the representative sets of democratic and republican users, the next step is to infer a user’s interests on Twitter. To address this challenge, we rely on the methodology in [3], which for a user u, returns a list of topics of interest of ualong with the frequency of each topic. Here the frequency of a topic indicates the number of users whom ufollows, who have been labelled with this topic using the aforementioned method in [12, 36]. For instance, if a user ufollows 3 users tagged with ‘politics’ and 4 users tagged with ‘music’, then the returned list would be fpolitics: 3, music: 4g. We convert this<topic, frequency >list into a weighted tfid fvector for user u, where the id f-s are computed considering the in- terest lists of all the users in our dataset. We refer to this tfid fvector as the interest-vector Iuof the user u. Speciﬁ- cally, if a user ufollows fusers on a particular topic, then the corresponding entry in the interest-vector of uis computed using tf= 1 + logf andid f=logN n, where Nis the num- ber of all users in our dataset, and nis the number of users who follow at least one user tagged with this topic. Note that, if we are unable to get the followings of a user (due to her account being protected, or her following no one), or if she follows too few users (less than 10), we are not able to infer her interests and hence political leaning. However, the study [3] showed that this methodology of inferring inter- ests is applicable for a very large fraction of active users in Twitter. Matching interests of user to interests of democrats and republicans: Using the aforementioned formulation, we also obtain the interest vectors of all the users in the two seed sets. Then, we construct a normalized aggregate interest vec- tor for the democrat seed set (I D) and the republican seed set (I R), by aggregating the interest vectors of all users in Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 421 the set and normalizing such that each aggregate vector sums up to 1.0. Some of the top terms in IDare[progressive, democrats, obama, dems, policy, liberals, p2, activists, dc, international] while those in IRare[patriots, conservative, tcot, right, gop, republican, tea party, republicans, fox news, pundits], where the terms are ranked in decreasing order of theirtfid fscores. We observe that apart from terms related to politics, the two vectors also differ in terms of their em- phasis on other topics, for example IRgives higher weight to sports-related terms, while IDgives higher weight to terms related to technology and entertainment. Thus, these vectors can be used to infer the likely political bias of a wide range of users, even if they are not explicitly following politicians on Twitter, or even if they are following politicians from both parties. Finally, given a user uwhose political bias is to be inferred, we obtain the interest-vector Iuofu(as described above), and compute the cosine similarity of IuwithIDandIR. Then the bias score of user uis given by, Bias(u ) =cossim(I u; ID) cossim(I u; IR): (5) We max-min normalize these differences in similarity, such that the bias score of a user lies in the range [ 1:0; 1:0]. A bias score closer to +1:0 indicates that uis more democratic leaning, and a score closer to  1:0 indicates that uis more republican leaning. Public deployment of the source bias inference method- ology: We have publicly deployed the aforementioned source bias inference methodology in the form of a Twitter application, at http://twitter-app:mpi-sws:org/search- political-bias-of-users/. One can login to the applica- tion using her Twitter credentials, and see their inferred polit- ical afﬁliation. One can also search for other Twitter users to check out their inferred political leaning. Evaluation of Political Bias Inference Methodology To check whether the source bias inference methodology works well for whole spectrum of politically interested users, we carry out the evaluation considering three test sets of Twit- ter users – (i) politically interested common users, selected randomly from the set of users who have retweeted the two parties’ accounts on Twitter, (ii) the current US senators, for whom it is well known which political party they represent, and (iii) self-identiﬁed common users, each having fewer than 1000 followers, who have themselves indicated their political ideology in their Twitter account bios. We ﬁrst use the set of politically interested common users to evaluate how good our inferred bias score is. After estab- lishing that our bias score works, we deﬁne thresholds on the score to categorize users into three distinct categories – re- publican, neutral, democratic. Finally we present how well our inference methodology works for the senators and self identiﬁed common users. We evaluate the methodology with respect to two metrics: (i)coverage – for what fraction of Twitter users can the methodology infer the political bias, and (ii) accuracy – for what fraction of users is the inference correct.Evaluation for politically interested common users To identify a set of politically interested common users, we followed the methodology given in [22]. We used the Twit- ter accounts of democratic (@TheDemocrats) and republican (@GOP) parties as seed accounts, and collected up to 100 retweeters of each of the most recent 3,200 tweets posted by the two accounts. Doing so, we collected 98,955 dis- tinct users who retweeted @TheDemocrats and 71,270 dis- tinct users who retweeted @GOP. Out of these users, we ran- domly selected 100 retweeters each of the democratic and re- publican account, giving us a test set of 200 common users who are politically interested. Judging the ground truth bias of test users: To get the bias annotations for political leanings of these 200 users, we con- ducted an Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) survey where human workers were shown a link to a user’s Twitter pro- ﬁle, and asked to label the user as either pro-democratic, pro- republican, or neutral, based on the user’s proﬁle attributes and the tweets posted by the user. We got judgements from 50 distinct AMT workers for each test user. The AMT bias score of each user was computed by adding +1for each pro- democratic judgement,  1for each pro-republican judge- ment and 0for each neutral judgement, and then normal- izing by the total number of judgements. Thus, the AMT bias score for a user lies in the range [ 1:0; 1:0], where a more positive score indicates a stronger democratic bias (with more AMT workers labelling the user as pro-democratic), whereas a more negative score indicates a stronger republi- can bias (with more AMT workers labelling the user as pro- republican). Evaluating our inferred score: Our methodology could in- fer the bias of all the 200 selected users (coverage = 100%). To quantify the accuracy of the methodology, we check whether our inferred bias scores correlate well with the AMT bias scores. To verify this, we present Table 2 and Table 3. In Table 2, we bin our inferred bias scores for these test users into three ranges [-1.0, -0.5], (-0.5, 0.5) and [0.5, 1.0], and then we com- pute the average AMT bias scores for users in each bin. As can be seen from Table 2, the average AMT bias score for Bin 1 (corresponding to users inferred to be strongly republi- can) is strongly republican leaning ( 0:86), while the average AMT bias score for Bin 3 (corresponding to users inferred to be strongly democratic) is strongly democratic leaning (0:93). Similar results are seen when we bin the users based on AMT bias scores and then compute the average inferred bias score for the users in each bin (as shown in Table 3), demonstrating that our inferred bias scores are well correlated with the AMT bias scores. We also observe that, though there is high correlation between the AMT bias scores and our inferred scores, the spread of the distribution of the two scores in the interval [ 1:0; 1:0] are quite different. This difference is shown in Figure 2 which plots the CDF of the two scores. We observe that while many of the AMT bias scores are close to the boundaries of the interval, most of the inferred scores lie within [ 0:5; +0:5]. Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 422 Inferred bias score bins Avg. AMT bias score Inferred Bin 1 [-1.0, -0.5]  0:86 Inferred Bin 2 (-0.5, 0.5) 0.14 Inferred Bin 3 [0.5, 1.0] 0.93 Table 2: Match between the AMT bias score and our Inferred bias score: Average AMT bias scores of users binned according to their Inferred bias score. AMT bias score bins Avg. Inferred bias score AMT Bin 1 [-1.0, -0.5]  0:32 AMT Bin 2 (-0.5, 0.5)  0:02 AMT Bin 3 [0.5, 1.0] 0.14 Table 3: Match between the AMT bias score and our Inferred bias score: Average Inferred bias scores of users binned according to their AMT bias score. This difference in the spread of the distributions motivated us to discretize our inferred bias score, and categorize users into three classes – democratic-leaning, republican-leaning, or neutral. Discretizing the bias score into categories: Having estab- lished that our inferred bias score correlates well with the AMT bias score, we now want to categorize users accord- ing to their bias. To do so, we take the conservative ap- proach of labelling a user as democratic or republican only when we have high conﬁdence, otherwise to label them as neutral. To achieve this categorisation, we decided to ﬁx a suitable threshold x2[0:0;1:0], and label the users with in- ferred bias score lying within ( x; x) as neutral, the users having inferred bias score in the range [ 1:0; x] as repub- licans, and the users having inferred bias score in the range [x;1:0]as democrats. We experimented with several choices for the threshold x= 0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.08 and 0.1. For each choice, we computed a confusion matrix of the match between AMT bias scores and the inferred bias scores. For instance, Table 4 depicts the confusion matrix of the match between AMT bias scores and the inferred bias scores for x= 0:03. We found that the threshold of x= 0:03 maxi- mizes the sum of the diagonal of the confusion matrix. In the later sections of the paper, we will label users as democrats or republicans, only when their inferred score falls outside of the neutral zone ( 0:03; 0:03).  0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 -1 -0.5  0  0.5  1CDF Bias ScoreAMT bias score Inferred bias score Figure 2: CDF of AMT bias scores and Inferred bias scores for politi- cally interested common users.AMT bias score Inferred Rep Inferred Neutral Inferred Dem AMT Bin 1 84.05% 13.04% 2.89% AMT Bin 2 18.18% 45.45% 36.36% AMT Bin 3 3.89% 12.98% 83.11% Table 4: Confusion matrix of the match between AMT bias scores and Inferred bias scores Political Bias Coverage Accuracy Current US Senators Democratic (n=45) 97.78% 86.36% Republican (n=54) 98.15% 98.11% Average 97.96% 92.23% Self-identiﬁed common users Democratic (n=426) 92.01% 88.52% Republican (n=675) 90.22% 82.95% Average 91.12% 85.73% Table 5: Coverage and accuracy of the political bias inference methodol- ogy for (i) current US senators, and (ii) common users who have declared their political ideology in their Twitter account proﬁle. Inclusion of a neutral zone has both pros and cons. While now we have higher conﬁdence in our labels of democrats and republicans, some of the users who are marginally demo- cratic or republican may now get labelled as neutral. But we make this conservative choice for our analyses, so as to not overestimate the bias in the search results. Evaluation for popular users (US senators) The performance of the methodology for the 100 current US senators is summarized in Table 5. The methodology has a very high coverage for the US senators, and failed to infer the political bias for only two senators, one from each party. Fur- ther investigation showed that one of these senators did not follow anyone on Twitter, while the other followed only one other user; hence, we could not infer their topical interests. In terms of accuracy, our methodology correctly identiﬁed the political bias of 98.1% of the Republican senators for whom bias could be inferred, and 86.4% of the Democrat senators whose bias could be inferred. Evaluation for self-identiﬁed common users: For our ﬁnal test set, we chose users who have themselves indicated their political ideology in their Twitter account bi- ography. Using the service Followerwonk (http://moz:com/ followerwonk), we obtained users located in the United States, with fewer than 1000 followers (to ensure that we get common users), whose bios contained certain keywords matching democrats (‘democrat’, ‘liberal’, ‘progressive’) and republicans (‘republican’, ‘conservative’, ‘libertarian’, ‘tea party’). The bio of each user was then manually inspected, and we retained only those users whose bios actually reﬂected their political ideology. For instance, users having bios like “I am a #conservative #Christian who is neither a #Demo- crat nor a #Republican, but an #Independent voter” and “We hate Politicians - Democrats, Republicans, all of them.” were discarded. Finally we obtained 426 self-identiﬁed democratic users and 675 self-identiﬁed republican users. Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 423 The performance of the proposed bias detection methodology on these users with self-identiﬁed biases is also indicated in Table 5. The coverage is 91.12% on average, across demo- cratic and republican users. Closer inspection of the users for whom we could not infer the bias revealed that they were ei- ther protected accounts, or they followed too few accounts, and as a result their interests could not be inferred. The interest vectors of correctly inferred self-identiﬁed demo- cratic users contain political terms like ‘liberal’, ‘progres- sive’, and ‘dem’, as well as other terms like ‘gay’, ‘lgbt’, ‘sci- ence’, and ‘tech’. In contrast, those for self-identiﬁed repub- lican users contain political terms like ‘tea’, ‘gop’, and ‘palin’ along with other related terms like ‘patriots’, ‘military’, and ‘vets’. On the other hand, many of the users for whom we in- ferred the incorrect leaning either have opposite leaning tags in their interest vectors, or their non-political interests end up matching the interests of the opposite side more than their own. However, the overall accuracy of bias inference for these self-identiﬁed common users is also high (85.73% on average across democratic and republican users), as shown in Table 5. Match between Source Bias & Content Bias As stated earlier, we use the source bias (i.e., the bias of the user who posted a tweet) to quantify the bias of a tweet, in- stead of using content bias. In this section, we investigate how closely source bias and content bias of a tweet reﬂect each other. Judging the content bias: For each of our selected queries like “democratic debate”, “republican debate”, “hillary clin- ton” and “donald trump” (more details on query selection in the next section), we considered two Twitter search snapshots – one during the republican debate on December 15, 2015 and another during the democratic debate on December 19, 2015. In each snapshot we collected the ﬁrst page (20 tweets) of search results, leading to a total of 881 distinct tweets, which we use to analyze the extent to which source bias and content bias match each other. To get the content bias annotations for these 881 tweets, we conducted an Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) survey where human workers were shown each tweet (but notthe user who posted it), and they were asked to label the tweet as pro- democratic, pro-republican, or neutral. We got judgements from 10 distinct workers for each tweet. The content bias score of each tweet was computed in the same manner as de- scribed in the earlier section titled “Evaluation for politically interested common users”. To what extent do source bias and content bias match each other? For studying the match between source bias and con- tent bias, we divide the range of content bias scores into 7 bins, as shown in Table 6, varying from neutral to strongly biased on both sides. The ﬁrst thing to note from Table 6 is that when the content is strongly biased, the match between the source and content bias is high (about 75% or more), ir- respective of whether the content is biased towards the demo- crat or the republican perspective. This indicates that strongly biased content is mostly produced by the users with the sameContent Bias Fraction Source Bias of tweets Frac Frac Frac Dem Rep Neu Strongly rep 13.85% 74.59% 10.66% 14.75% [ 1:0; 0:75) Moderately rep 22.02% 55.73% 13.02% 31.25% [ 0:75;  0:25) Weakly rep 10.33% 22.22% 22.22% 55.56% [ 0:25 ;0:0) Neutral 5.68% 20.41% 8.16% 71.43% [0:0;0:0] Weakly dem 10.44% 23.33% 13.33% 63.33% (0:0;0:25] Moderately dem 23.16% 16.5% 16.0% 67.5% (0:25;0:75] Strongly dem 14.53% 9.76% 9.76% 80.49% (0:75;1:0] Table 6: Fraction of tweets in the different ranges of the content bias score (based on AMT workers’ judgement), and the match between the source and content bias in the different ranges. source bias. On the other hand, when the content is weakly bi- ased, our inferred source bias has little or no correlation with the content bias, since such weakly biased / neutral content is equally likely to be produced by users with either bias. Next we present the results of applying our bias quantiﬁcation framework, using the source bias inference methodology, for analyzing political searches on Twitter. RQ2: CHARACTERIZING POLITICAL BIAS IN SOCIAL ME- DIA SEARCH To characterize the bias in Twitter search results via our framework, we ﬁrst describe the queries we selected and the data we gathered from Twitter for our chosen context of US presidential primaries. We then analyze the collected data to understand the possible sources of bias in Twitter Search (RQ2a) and the interplay between the input data and the rank- ing system that produces the output bias – the bias in the search results observed by Twitter users (RQ2b). The Selection of Search Queries: In order to study search bias via the proposed framework, it would be ideal to have access to the actual search queries that people are using on Twitter to get information about the 2016 US Presidential primary debates. However, as researchers we did not have access to this proprietary dataset. We, therefore, followed the two step methodology used in [19] of ﬁrst identifying a seed set of queries and then expanding them to satisfy two proper- ties. Our seed set of queries is comprised of the terms “demo- cratic debate”, and “republican debate”, and their shortened versions “dem debate” and“rep debate” that are popular on Twitter to accommodate the short length of tweets. Next we expanded our query set to include other likely related queries that satisﬁed two properties: (i) the queries should be used by many users, and (ii) the queries should not be biased to a particular party. To satisfy the ﬁrst property, we used hashtags to expand our query set, since hashtags are used ex- tensively on Twitter by users to tag and follow discussions about political topics [5]. Moreover, hashtags act as recom- mended queries on Twitter; when a user clicks on a hashtag, Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 424 a Twitter search page for that hashtag is presented to her. To identify such hashtags, we collected the Twitter search results for our four seed queries during the November 2015 republi- can and democratic debates. We then identiﬁed the most fre- quently occurring hashtags containing the term “debate” to ensure that they are related to the presidential debates. We found 57 hashtags related to the democratic debate and 63 re- lated to the republican debate. From these, we selected the top 10 hashtags popular within each political party. This re- sulted in 15 distinct hashtags. In addition to being popular, we wanted the queries in our ex- panded set to be unbiased to avoid over estimating the bias in search results. We, therefore, removed biased search queries (e.g., #debatewithbernie, #hillarycantdebate), and only re- tained queries for whom its difﬁcult to estimate the political leaning of the poster. This approach resulted in the follow- ing queries: democratic debate, dem debate, #democraticde- bate, #demdebate, republican debate, rep debate, #republi- candebate and #gopdebate. In addition, given that politically interested users (irrespective of their leaning) can search for any candidate by name, we also included the names of the 17 presidential candidates to our set of queries. We use our quantiﬁcation framework with these 25 queries to measure the bias for political searches on Twitter. Data Collection: For our analysis, we selected a one week time period that contained both a republican and a democratic debate – December 14 - 21, 2015. The Republican debate aired on December 15, and the Democratic debate aired on December 19. Our goal was to capture a representative col- lection of tweets from Twitter Search that represented both parties at similar points in time and for a similar event. From this time period, we collected Twitter search results for each of the selected queries. Twitter search provides different ﬁlters on the search results including “top”, “live”, “news”, “photos” and “videos”.4The default, “top” results, contain the tweets chosen by the propri- etary Twitter ranking system based on many factors, includ- ing the number of users that engaged with a tweet5. This ﬁlter provides us with the output set for a given search query. To collect the output set, we collected the top 20 search results on the ﬁrst page for each query at 10-minute intervals for the whole aforementioned time period. The political bias of this set is the Output Bias deﬁned in our quantiﬁcation frame- work. In total, across all the selected queries, we collected 28,800 snapshots that included 34,904 distinct tweets made by 17,624 distinct users. To collect the input data to the ranking algorithm, we used Twitter’s streaming API to collect all of the tweets that con- tained our selected queries during our data collection period and used this chronologically ordered tweet stream to calcu- late the Input Bias. Overall, across all the queries, we col- lected more than 8.2 million tweets posted during this time period, by 1.88 million distinct users which comprise of the input data for our selected queries. 4https://twitter:com/search-home 5https://support:twitter:com/articles/131209Query Output Bias Input Bias Ranking Bias (TOB) (TIB) (TRB) Queries Related to Democratic Candidates Hillary Clinton 0.21 0.03 0.18 Bernie Sanders 0.71 0.55 0.16 Martin O’Malley 0.64 0.57 0.07 Average 0:52 0:38 0:14 Queries Related to Republican Candidates Donald Trump 0.29 0.19 0.10 Ted Cruz  0:48  0:11  0:37 Marco Rubio  0:41  0:12  0:29 Ben Carson 0.46 0.20 0.26 Chris Christie  0:14 0.27  0:41 Jeb Bush  0:31 0.09  0:40 Rand Paul  0:37  0:18  0:19 Carly Fiorina 0.16 0.38  0:22 John Kasich  0:09  0:13 0.04 Mike Huckabee 0.30 0.12 0.18 Rick Santorum  0:04 0.18  0:22 Lindsey Graham  0:45 0.07  0:52 George Pataki  0:17 0.09  0:26 Jim Gilmore  0:35  0:11  0:24 Average  0:11 0:07  0:18 Queries related to democratic debate democratic debate 0.43 0.38 0.05 dem debate 0.52 0.29 0.23 #democraticdebate 0.28 0.19 0.07 #demdebate 0.57 0.56 0.01 Average 0.45 0.35 0:10 Queries related to republican debate republican debate 0.53 0.27 0.26 rep debate 0.31 0.40  0:09 #republicandebate 0.39 0.34 0.05 #gopdebate 0.04 0.10  0:06 Average 0.32 0.28 0:04 Table 7: Time averaged bias in Twitter search “top” results, for selected queries (related to political candidates and debates) – output bias TOB , input bias TIB , and ranking bias TRB . Here a bias value closer to +1:0 indicates democratic bias and a value closer to  1:0 indicates republican bias. De-Personalizing the Search Results: Our objective is to in- vestigate possible bias created by the ranking of presented tweets. Because bias may be introduced by personalization features associated with the Twitter user issuing the query, we focused on the consistent, non-personalized ranking of results shown to every user to examine bias. To mitigate personal- ization effects (e.g., geographical personalization based on IP addresses), all search queries were made without logging in to Twitter, and from the same IP subnet. RQ2a: Where Does the Bias Come from? It is Not Always the Ranking System: Input Data Matters Table 7 shows the three biases (output, input, and ranking) for the selected queries. It reveals that queries related to demo- cratic and republican candidates as well as democratic and re- publican debates have a democratic-leaning input bias (larger than 0) on average. This observation implies that the full tweet stream containing these query-terms, without any inter- ference from the ranking system, contains a more democratic slant – although, the democratic bias for queries related to the republican debate and candidates is lower than that related to the democratic debate and candidates, on average. Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 425 It is important to note that there exists a pre-existing bias in the input data to the ranking system, and that this input bias can have a signiﬁcant effect on the ﬁnal output search bias seen by the end user. In the case of Bernie Sanders, for exam- ple, the output search bias is very democratic (0:71); only a small fraction of this bias comes from the Twitter rank- ing system, while the majority originates from the input data, indicating that most of the Twitter population that discusses Bernie Sanders on Twitter has a democratic leaning. The ef- fect of input data on the search results’ bias highlights the importance of incorporating the input data when auditing al- gorithms, and teasing out how much of the bias is present in the data itself and how much is contributed by the algorithmic system. The democratic leaning input bias on Twitter for a large ma- jority of the queries can be explained by the bias of over- all Twitter corpus. We measure the bias of the Twitter cor- pus in two ways: (i) User population bias: The bias of 1000 Twitter users selected randomly from the Twitter userid space (i.e., the user-ids were randomly selected from the range of 1 through the id assigned to a newly created account in Decem- ber 2015), and (ii) Full tweet stream bias: The bias of 1000 tweets selected randomly from Twitter’s 1% random sample for December 2015. For measuring the corpus bias in both cases, we applied the same methodology as used for measur- ing the input bias, i.e., measuring the bias of the users and the source bias of the tweets. These two approaches resulted in a population bias of 0:25 and a full tweet stream bias of 0:3. These positive bias values show that the population of Twit- ter users is democratic-leaning, and this bias is even more democratic-leaning when we consider the active users whose tweets have been included in the full tweet stream (measured using Twitter’s 1% random sample). These ﬁndings are in- line with prior studies [31] which have shown that Twitter has a high fraction of democratic leaning users. It is important to note that, though the Twitter corpus has a democratic-leaning bias, the input bias (TIB) of the different queries varies across the spectrum (as shown in Table 7). This variation is because each query acts as a ﬁlter to extract a sub- set of Twitter users whose tweets are relevant to that queries, and the sets of users ﬁltered out by different queries have dif- fering biases. Therefore, athough the corpus bias of Twitter is uniform, the speciﬁc query being considered determines the input data set and hence the input bias, which in turn affects the ﬁnal output bias observed by the user. The Power of the Ranking System The ranking biases in Table 7 show that while data has a ma- jor role in the search results’ bias, the ranking system still plays a signiﬁcant role by shifting the bias or even changing its polarity. Comparing the output bias and the input bias for the democratic and republican candidate queries reveals an interesting discovery—on average, the ranking system shifts the bias of each category towards that party’s leaning. For democratic candidate queries, on average, the ranking system enhanced the democratic bias of the input by 0:14, making the output results more democratic (TOB = 0:52). On the other hand, for queries related to republican candidates, on average,TRB of Ranking Strategies Query Twitter’s Most Most Ranking Retweeted Favorited First First Queries Related to Democratic Candidates Hillary Clinton 0.18 0.33 0.25 Bernie Sanders 0.16 0.22 0.16 Martin O’Malley 0.07 0.001 0.1 Queries Related to Republican Candidates Donald Trump 0.10 0.06 0.09 Ted Cruz  0:37  0:49  0:35 Marco Rubio  0:29  0:36  0:27 Ben Carson 0.26 0.23 0.25 Chris Christie  0:41  0:40  0:34 Jeb Bush  0:40  0:46  0:34 Rand Paul  0:19  0:25  0:17 Carly Fiorina  0:22  0:17  0:18 John Kasich 0.04 0.04 0.11 Mike Huckabee 0.18 0.11 0.19 Rick Santorum  0:22  0:34  0:16 Lindsey Graham  0:52  0:45  0:56 George Pataki  0:26  0:22  0:23 Jim Gilmore  0:24  0:22  0:21 Queries related to democratic debate democratic debate 0.05 0.21 0.12 dem debate 0.23 0.22 0.22 #democraticdebate 0.07 0.08 0.14 #demdebate 0.01  0:01 0.01 Queries related to republican debate republican debate 0.26 0.274 0.268 rep debate  0:09  0:09  0:09 #republicandebate 0.05 0.08 0.17 #gopdebate  0:06  0:06  0:02 Table 8: Time averaged ranking bias for different ranking strategies: (i) Twitter’s ranking (Twitter search “top” results), (ii) Most retweeted tweet ﬁrst ranking, and (iii) Most favorited tweet ﬁrst ranking. Here a bias value closer to +1:0 indicates democratic bias and a value closer to  1:0 indicates republican bias. the ranking system increased the republican bias of the input by0:18—to the point that it changed the polarity of the out- put bias making the ﬁnal results republican (TOB = 0:11), even though the average input bias had a democratic leaning. This change of polarity of bias via the ranking system is more noticeable for some republican candidates. For instance, for Chris Christie, Jeb Bush and Lindsey Graham, while the in- put bias was positive, indicating that more democratic lean- ing users tweeted about them, the ranking system switched the leaning of the output results to republican. These shifts in the bias caused by the ranking system (that can also result in a polarity change), exhibit the ranking systems power in altering the inherent bias of the input data. The ranking of posts in social media search systems is inﬂu- enced by a number of factors, including the content’s pop- ularity (e.g., number of retweets or favorites), the author’s popularity (e.g., number of followers or lists), as well as the recency of the post. While our goal in this work is not to reverse engineer Twitter’s ranking algorithm, we wanted to gain some insight into the extent to which different factors contribute to the overall observed bias. We, therefore, con- structed rankings “solely” based on individual factors and ex- amine the bias of these rankings. Table 8 shows the time av- eraged ranking bias of Twitter’s ranking, as well as, the bias Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 426 for two ranking strategies, each based on a single measure of posts’ popularity, namely the number of retweets and the number of favorites, respectively. Table 8 shows that the ranking biases of the three strategies are quite similar to each other, indicating that popularity of the post can explain much of the observed bias in Twitter’s ranking. For instance, for Chris Christie, Jeb Bush and Lind- sey Graham, even though most of the users tweeting about them are democratic leaning (as shown by positive TIB val- ues in Table 7), most of the popular tweets about them are made by republican leaning users (as shown by the negative TRB values for popularity based ranking strategies in Ta- ble 8). However, in some cases like Martin O’Malley, John Kasich, democratic debate and #republicandebate, the differ- ence in the TRB values between Twitter’s ranking and the popularity based rankings indicate that, while popularity of posts is a factor that could explain a large part of the observed bias in Twitter search results, there are probably other factors that contribute to the overall bias of the search results. Note that the above experiment is just a ﬁrst step towards unpack- ing the inﬂuence of the different factors on the overall bias of search results in a social media like Twitter, and we defer a more in-depth analysis for the future. RQ2b: The Collective Contribution of the Input Data and the Ranking System Given the impact of the input data and the inﬂuence of the ranking system on the bias of Twitter search results, we were curious to explore the dynamics between the input data and the ranking system when producing the output bias. While Table 7 shows a variance of output biases across the queries as a result of the interplay between the two, we particularly looked for the cases where the resulting output bias could af- fect a user’s search experience noticeably. Below, we describe two of these cases by ﬁrst analyzing the output bias and then exploring the input data’s and the ranking system’s contribu- tion to the resulting output bias for each of these cases. The Case of Popular Candidates Examining the Output Bias: Comparing the output bias of the candidates in Table 7, we found a noticeable trend in the output bias of popular candidates compared to the rest of the candidates with the same political leaning – the search results for the more popular candidates have a higher bias towards the opposing perspective.6For instance, the top search re- sults for Hillary Clinton, the most popular democratic can- didate during this time, contained fewer democratic results (TOB = 0:21) than the search results for other democratic candidates. Similarly, the search results for the query “Don- ald Trump”, the most popular republican candidate during this time, contained fewer republican results (TOB = 0:29) when compared to the search results of other republican can- didates. Therefore, if a user searches for popular candidate names in Twitter search, the top results have much higher bias toward the opposing perspective, while this is not as extreme for the less popular candidates. 6The popularity of a candidate is estimated from the polling data obtained from [33] for December 2015. -1-0.5 0 0.5 1 Donald-Trump Ted-Cruz Marco-Rubio Ben-Carson Chris-Christie Jeb-Bush Rand-Paul Carly-Fiorina John-Kasich Mike-Huckabee Rick-Santorum Lindsey-Graham George-Pataki Jim-GilmoreOutput Bias (TOB)Figure 3: The time averaged output bias TOB in Twitter “top” search results for the Republican candidates – candidates are listed left to right from highest to lowest popularity. In Figure 3, we plotted the output bias for the search results of republican candidates ranked by their popularity to examine if there is a correlation between the popularity of a candidate and his output bias.7The negative slope of the line of best ﬁt in Figure 3 supports the observation that the more popular a candidate is, the more is the opposing perspective reﬂected in his or her top search results. This situation may be undesirable for popular candidates, es- pecially if users from the opposite perspective are more likely to speak negatively about the candidate. We illustrate this case using Table 9, which shows tweets randomly sampled from the set of tweets posted by users with an opposing po- larity when compared to the candidate. These tweets were included in the top search results for the queries Hillary Clin- ton and Donald Trump, and they all either criticize or attempt to ridicule the candidates. If an unbiased and potentially un- decided voter searches for information about a popular pres- idential candidate, she would very likely see negative tweets posted by users of opposing leaning about the candidate. Sim- ilar to the ﬁndings of [8], this situation can be undesirable for the candidates as these negative tweets may impact the per- ceptions of these undecided voters. The Contribution of Different Sources of Bias: Given the differing output bias trend for popular candidates compared to other candidates and the potential side effects, we explored if this differential output bias is inherent in the input tweets made by Twitter users or if it results from the ranking algo- rithm. To understand this, we compared the input and output bias for the queries Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. We found that the input bias for these queries leaned towards the opposite political view (similar to what we found in the output bias), indicating that the twitter users who talk about popular candidates are likely from the opposite political leaning than users who talk about the less popular candidates. However, the manner in which the ranking system altered the input to produce the output and accordingly its bias was dif- ferent for the two most popular candidates. While Hillary Clinton is discussed by republican users more than the other 7We did not perform this test for democratic candidates because there were only three of them. Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 427 Randomly selected tweets from ‘Hillary Clinton’ search results, which are posted by a republican leaning userRandomly selected tweets from ‘Donald Trump’ search results, which are posted by a democratic leaning user WT: Watchdog wants federal ethics probe of Clinton, possible im- proprieties http://bit.ly/1NvlrPAWilliamsburg, #Brooklyn Dec 15 #trump2016 #MussoliniGrumpy- cat #MakeAmericaHateAgain #DonaldTrump @realDonaldTrump pic.twitter.com/Hj6DC7M7V1 The Clintons both Bill and Hillary have a very long history of framing others while they commit the Crimes. History has destroyed the proofScotland defeats Trump on clean energy. Hopefully hell have a lot of time for golﬁng soon [url] @CarlyFiorina: @realDonaldTrump is a big Christmas gift wrapped up under the tree for @HillaryClinton. [url]Dirty little secret: Donald Trump is not a good debater. @CNN @HillaryClinton @BernieSanders hell no shes a murderer pic.twitter.com/zGQwR7dLZjhttp://MLive.com - Where Donald Trumps Michigan campaign do- nations come from http://ow.ly/39hCWt I dont care if youre a Democrat or Republican, how can you trust a word Hillary Clinton says and how can you consider voting for her??Enjoy the sweet music of Donald Trump in Carol of the Trumps [url] Table 9: Randomly selected tweets from the search results for the queries Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, which are posted by a user with an opposite bias as compared to the candidate. democratic candidates (TIB = 0:03), the ranking system mitigated this undesirable situation by increasing the demo- cratic output bias of the search results by a factor of seven as compared to the input bias. That is, the ranking system di- rected the search results for Hillary Clinton towards the per- spective of her own party. For Donald Trump the situation is the opposite. More democratic leaning users tweet about him (TIB = 0:19) than the other republican candidates, and the ranking system enhanced this input bias resulting in more democratic tweets in the output search results. So, while the ranking system mitigated the opposite bias in the search re- sults for Hillary Clinton, it enhanced it for Donald Trump. This means that if a user searches for most popular candi- dates from each political party, the results favor Hillary Clin- ton over Donald Trump, while this was not the case in the input data. These opposing dynamics between the input data and the ranking system, while inadvertent, can have serious implications, especially for the candidate for whom the rank- ing system enhanced the view points of the opposite leaning users. Different Phrasings of Similar Queries Examining the Output Bias: Different users who seek in- formation about a certain topic might phrase their queries differently; e.g., for the event republican debate, the queries could be republican debate, rep debate, #republicandebate or #gopdebate. While these differently phrased queries re- fer to the exact same event, the search results might differ substantially, particularly in the situation when users of dif- ferent leanings selectively use different keywords and hash- tags in their tweets to refer to the same event. This differ- ence in search results for slightly differently phrased queries is common in many search engines, but whether the results for these similar queries exhibit different political biases is an open question. To answer this question, in Table 7, we compare the output bi- ases of similarly phrased queries referring to the same event. We found that the output bias of two similar search queries for the same event can differ noticeably. For example, the output results for the query republican debate have approx- imately twice the democratic leaning bias (TOB = 0:53) as compared to the the output bias of the query rep debate (TOB = 0:31). Similar noticeable differences also exist inthe output bias for the queries related to the event democratic debate (e.g., democratic debate vs #democraticdebate). The Contribution of Different Sources of Bias: To under- stand the sources of these differences between the output bias of similarly phrased queries, we compared the contributions of the input data and the ranking system to their output bias. As seen in Table 7, the input data contributes more to the output bias for similarly phrased queries. In a few cases, however, the ranking system affects the input data noticeably, leading to two similarly phrased queries with similar input bi- ases to have search results with very different output biases. For example, comparison of the biases of the queries repub- lican debate (TIB = 0:27) and rep debate (TIB = 0:40) reveals that while the input bias for these queries is similar, the ranking system altered their bias in opposing directions. That is, while the ranking system increased the bias of the republican debate query by 0:26 making it more democratic, it decreased the bias of the rep debate query by 0:09, mak- ing it more republican. Even when the input bias of these two queries was similar, the ranking system made one query signiﬁcantly more democratic than the other. This example illustrates the inﬂuence a search system exerts on the input data, by curating search results with different biases for two similar queries with similar input biases. These examples illustrate the interplay between the input data and the ranking system which produces different output bi- ases for similarly phrased queries and for queries on popular political candidate. These observations lead to new questions for search engine design: How do these complex interac- tions between the input data and the ranking system affect the users’ search experience and how can we make users aware of these effects? In the next section, we brieﬂy discuss solutions for signaling bias in search results to the users. DISCUSSION Generalizability of the Bias Quantiﬁcation Framework Extending to other search engines: Our proposed frame- work can be applied to other search engines (e.g., web search engines, other social media search engines) to quantify the bias in the search results even if the search algorithm hides within a black box and the internal details of the retrieval and ranking algorithms are not known (which is almost always Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 428 the case for real-world proprietary search engines). The only pre-requisite for applying the framework is that a method- ology for measuring the bias of individual data items (e.g., web-pages, tweets) is available. Our bias quantiﬁcation framework (shown in Figure 1) works well for social media search, where it is possible to separate the contributions of the input data and the ranking algorithm to the ﬁnal output bias. However, in many modern-day IR systems, data items in the corpus are directly ranked based on their relevance to the query, without generating any in- termediate set of relevant items. In such systems, it is hard to disentangle the bias introduced by the input data from the bias added by the ranking process. But, we can still compare therelative biases of different ranking systems, under the as- sumption that both operate upon similar data corpora. For instance, the ranking algorithms of Bing and Google search could be compared with each other by observing their output biases for the same set of queries. Extending to multiple perspectives scenario: Even though we have applied our quantiﬁcation framework for a two- perspective scenario of US politics, our framework can be extended to multiple perspectives by having a bias vector for each item, rather than a scalar score as we have now. For in- stance, if the search scenario under consideration has pdiffer- ent perspectives associated with each query (such as queries related to a political election contested by ppolitical parties), then each data item (e.g., a tweet) can be represented as a p- dimensional bias vector. Formally, the bias vector for the i-th data item would be given by Vi= [v1 i,v2 i,...,vp i], where vj i gives a measure of how biased the i-th data item is along the j-th perspective, with values in the range of [ 1;1]. A value ofvj i= 1 indicates that the item supports the j-th perspec- tive,vj i= 1indicates that the item opposes the perspective, whereas vj i= 0indicates that the item is neutral with respect to that perspective. Then Equations 2 to 5 can be converted to their vector addition formulations, to measure the input, out- put and ranking biases. A challenging aspect of extending to ap-dimensional scenario would be to develop a methodology to capture these bias vectors, and it would be interesting to explore this in the future. Signaling Political Bias in Search Results While our analyses show that social media search results have varying amounts of political bias, how this bias can be tackled is still an open question. In this section, we brieﬂy discuss some potential solutions to this question, but their in-depth exploration is left for future work. Incorporating Bias into the Ranking System: One solution for controlling bias could be to develop a ranking mechanism that considers bias as a metric and trades-off relevance and bias of the search results. For instance, a minimal value of average bias of the search results could be achieved by in- terleaving results from the various perspectives of a search query, using methods similar to those proposed to inject di- versity in search results [45, 49]. However, ﬁnding a suitable equilibrium between bias and other ranking factors is chal-lenging, specially because the trade-off point is likely to be domain and user speciﬁc. Additionally, including bias as a factor in the ranking systems might lead to a degradation of the top search results along relevancy, popularity, recency, or other metrics. Making bias transparent: Given the aforementioned prob- lems with changing the ranking of the search results, an alter- native method of addressing the bias can be to incorporate the bias into the front-end of the search engine (by visualizing the bias of search result), rather than into the ranking algorithm itself. Through this method, while the search algorithm’s ef- ﬁciency is not compromised, users can be made aware of the possible biases in their search results by marking each search result with its political bias. Such a nudging practice has been used widely in the literature for purposes like delivering mul- tiple aspects of news in social media [30] and encouraging reading of diverse political opinions [27, 28]. A hybrid approach of the above two methods could also be proposed, which not only shows the bias of each search re- sult, but also separates the results of the two political perspec- tives (republican and democratic) and shows them as distinct ranked lists, with each distinct list retaining the ranking of the results in the original ranked list. By preserving the origi- nal search engine’s ranking within each list, this methodology ensures that the quality of the top search results does not de- grade across other metrics such as relevance, popularity, and recency. Developing tools to signal political bias in search results, and conducting user studies to understand how users interact with such alternative search interface designs are important, and are left for future work. Auditing Black Boxes Recently, the rise of algorithmic platforms’ inﬂuence on users’ online experience has motivated many studies to au- dit these platforms and understand their biases. While some of these algorithmic systems’ functionalities are open to the public, making the auditing process easier, most of them are not. The walls of intellectual proprietary, high complexity of these algorithms and the perils of gaming a system via ma- licious users put these algorithms in a black box, making it almost infeasible to have access to an algorithm’s speciﬁca- tions from outside, like in our study. While we know about a few general factors that a search engines takes into account in curating the search results (such as relevancy, popularity, and recency), there are hundreds of other features that are hidden in a blackbox, preventing us as researchers from being able to pin-point the exact feature(s) of the algorithm which might be leading to the bias being introduced in the search results. Therefore, building on previous studies that have adopted this “black box” view for an algorithmic system while auditing it [4, 9, 14, 15, 20], we characterized the bias of the ranking algorithm in Twitter’s search platform, without knowing its internals. Our proposed auditing framework can help users, system designers and researchers to become aware of possi- ble biases of a search process, while they might not be aware of the details of the process itself. For users, this awareness Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 429 can result in more intelligent use of a system, knowing that their search results can be far from neutral in some cases. For system designers, such auditing platforms can be used to in- vestigate the algorithm’s speciﬁcations, particularly when the bias has been introduced by the algorithm and not the system input. And ﬁnally, researchers and watchdog organizations can actively utilize such auditing platforms to measure bias and compare it among different search platforms, making the research community and the system designers aware of po- tentially misleading biases. Distinguishing the Sources of Bias: From Development to Design Our study has proposed a ﬁrst step towards distinguishing the different sources of bias in a search engine. The observa- tion that a signiﬁcant part of the bias comes from the input data in some cases (without the interference of the ranking system) highlights the need to add data-driven perspective to algorithm audit studies, such that not only the output data is observed to understand the algorithm’s discriminatory or bi- ased behavior, but also the potential biases in the input data are investigated. Although a part of the output bias stems from the input data, our study revealed that an algorithm can inﬂuence the inher- ent bias of the input data signiﬁcantly, to the extent of even changing its polarity. This algorithmic power is of great im- portance particularly when a design choice in the interface gives higher visibility to the algorithm’s results than the input data. Twitter search, for example, provides users with “top” and “live” search results, where the former is the ranked list of tweets output by the search system and the latter is simply all the tweets containing the search query in reverse chrono- logical order, i.e. the input data. This means that a user look- ing for information about a topic is able to see both the input data (which might be more representative of the full Twitter data) and the output data in Twitter search if she wants. How- ever, to give people more relevant results in a shorter amount of time, Twitter has made the top results (the ranking sys- tems’s output) the default option rather than the live results (the input data). This design choice, while legitimate, gives the ranked results more visibility, making the output bias and accordingly the ranking system’s inﬂuence more highlighted than the input bias in the design. These design choices, along with the signiﬁcant effect of ranking system on the ﬁnal out- put search bias, suggest a new avenue of research for studying when and how the inﬂuence of the ranking system (particu- larly when it is more visible in the design), might result in showing a totally different side of a story to a user than what the input data would show to her. LIMITATIONS In this study, we focussed on a limited set of queries that were either related to a political event or a political candi- date, due to the limitation on the number of queries we could submit via Twitter API. Given the variation of bias over dif- ferent queries, we believe extending our query set to more general political queries on controversial topics such as gun control and abortion would strengthen our analysis, and wehope to pursue this in the future. Another limiting factor in our study was using the simplifying assumption of consider- ing a user as either neutral, pro-democratic or pro-republican. Under this assumption we can not have a user who is partially both pro-republican and pro-democrat. However, we should clarify that for doing this classiﬁcation, we still considered two scores for each user, one the similarity to republicans and the other similarity to democrats. Currently to give the user a ﬁnal leaning, we consider the difference of these similari- ties. However, in the future, we can use these two similarities to determine the extent to which a user is pro-democratic as well as pro-republican to have a more nuanced view of po- litical leanings of users. And lastly, while we have discussed some potential solutions for signaling political bias in search results, we have not as yet implemented our proposed solu- tions and evaluated the effect of this signaling on the users’ search experience. This exploration would be a good follow up of our current study. CONCLUSION To our knowledge, the present study developed the ﬁrst framework to quantify bias of ranked results in a search process, while being able to distinguish between different sources of bias. Via this ability, our framework not only mea- sures the bias in the output ranked list of search results, but is also able to capture how much of this bias is due to the bi- ased set of input data to the ranking system and how much is contributed by the ranking system itself. In the earlier search engine bias studies, these two factors have not been separated out. Our analyses revealed the signiﬁcant effect of both in- put data and the ranking algorithm in producing considerable bias in Twitter search results based on various factors such as the topic of a query or how the query is phrased. As more and more users are relying on social media search to follow live events and news on personalities [40], the vary- ing biases in search results can have signiﬁcant impact on the impression that users form about the different events and per- sonalities [8, 29]. We end by calling for mechanisms to make users more aware of the potential biases in search results, e.g., by presenting the results in a way that makes the different perspectives transparent to the user. Giving the users more control over the bias beyond just making them more aware of its existence could be a potential next step. For example, users could be given controls or ﬁlters to re-rank the search results to adjust for search biases – just as they can in ranking of products and services on sites like Amazon or Yelp. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was funded in part by NSF grant CHS-1564041. REFERENCES 1. Lada A. Adamic and Natalie Glance. 2005. The Political Blogosphere and the 2004 U.S. Election: Divided They Blog. In Proc. LinkKDD. 2. Solon Barocas and Andrew D Selbst. 2014. Big data’s disparate impact. Available at SSRN 2477899 (2014). 3. Parantapa Bhattacharya, Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Niloy Ganguly, Saptarshi Ghosh, and Krishna P. Gummadi. Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 430 2014. Inferring User Interests in the Twitter Social Network. In Proc. ACM RecSys. 4. Le Chen, Alan Mislove, and Christo Wilson. 2015. Peeking beneath the hood of uber. In In Proc. of the 2015 ACM Conference on Internet Measurement Conference. ACM, 495–508. 5. M. Conover, B. Gonc ¸alves, J. Ratkiewicz, A. Flammini, and F. Menczer. 2011a. Predicting the Political Alignment of Twitter Users. In Proc. IEEE SocialCom. 6. M. Conover, J. Ratkiewicz, Matthew Francisco, B Gonc ¸alves, F. Menczer, and A. Flammini. 2011b. Political Polarization on Twitter. In Proc. AAAI ICWSM. 7. Amit Datta, Michael Carl Tschantz, and Anupam Datta. 2014. Automated Experiments on Ad Privacy Settings: A Tale of Opacity, Choice, and Discrimination. Choice, and Discrimination. arXiv. org (2014). 8. Robert Epstein and Ronald E. Robertson. 2015. The search engine manipulation effect (SEME) and its possible impact on the outcomes of elections. Proc. of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) 112, 33 (2015), E4512–E4521. 9. Motahhare Eslami, Aimee Rickman, Kristen Vaccaro, Amirhossein Aleyasen, Andy Vuong, Karrie Karahalios, Kevin Hamilton, and Christian Sandvig. 2015. I always assumed that I wasn’t really that close to [her]: Reasoning about Invisible Algorithms in News Feeds. In In Proc. of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 153–162. 10. USA Executive Ofﬁce of the President. 2016. Big Data: A Report on Algorithmic Systems, Opportunity,and Civil Rights. http://tinyurl.com/Big-Data-White-House. (2016). 11. S. Fortunato, A. Flammini, F. Menczer, and A. Vespignani. 2006. Topical interests and the mitigation of search engine bias. Proc. of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) 103, 34 (2006), 12684–12689. 12. Saptarshi Ghosh, Naveen Sharma, Fabricio Benevenuto, Niloy Ganguly, and Krishna Gummadi. 2012. Cognos: Crowdsourcing Search for Topic Experts in Microblogs. InProc. ACM SIGIR. 13. Jennifer Golbeck and Derek Hansen. 2011. Computing Political Preference Among Twitter Followers. In ACM SIGCHI. 14. Aniko Hannak, Piotr Sapiezynski, Arash Molavi Kakhki, Balachander Krishnamurthy, David Lazer, Alan Mislove, and Christo Wilson. 2013. Measuring Personalization of Web Search. In Proc. WWW. 15. Aniko Hannak, Gary Soeller, David Lazer, Alan Mislove, and Christo Wilson. 2014. Measuring price discrimination and steering on e-commerce web sites. In In Proc. of the 2014 conference on internet measurement conference. ACM, 305–318.16. Alex Hern. 2015. Flickr faces complaints over ‘offensive’ auto-tagging for photos. http://tinyurl.com/Flickr-AutoTagging. (2015). 17. Itai Himelboim, Stephen McCreery, and Marc Smith. 2013. Birds of a feather tweet together: Integrating network and content analyses to examine cross-ideology exposure on Twitter. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 18, 2 (2013), 40–60. 18. Chloe Kliman-Silver, Aniko Hannak, David Lazer, Christo Wilson, and Alan Mislove. 2015. Location, Location, Location: The Impact of Geolocation on Web Search Personalization. In Proc. ACM IMC. 19. Danai Koutra, Paul N. Bennett, and Eric Horvitz. 2015. Events and Controversies: Inﬂuences of a Shocking News Event on Information Seeking. In Proc. WWW. 20. Q Vera Liao, Wai-Tat Fu, and Markus Strohmaier. 2016. # Snowden: Understanding Biases Introduced by Behavioral Differences of Opinion Groups on Social Media. In In Proc. of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 3352–3363. 21. Joseph Lichterman. 2010. New Pew data: More Americans are getting news on Facebook and Twitter. (2010). http://tinyurl.com/News-on-Social-Media. 22. Zhe Liu and Ingmar Weber. 2014. Is Twitter a public sphere for online conﬂicts? A cross-ideological and cross-hierarchical look. In International Conference on Social Informatics. Springer, 336–347. 23. Aibek Makazhanov and Davood Raﬁei. 2013. Predicting Political Preference of Twitter Users. In Proc. ASONAM. 24. Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schutze. 2008. Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press. 25. Amy Mitchell and Dana Page. 2015. The Evolving Role of News on Twitter and Facebook. Pew Research Center (2015). 26. Abbe Mowshowitz and Akira Kawaguchi. 2005. Measuring search engine bias. Information Processing and Management 41, 5 (2005), 1193–1205. 27. Sean A Munson, Stephanie Y Lee, and Paul Resnick. 2013. Encouraging Reading of Diverse Political Viewpoints with a Browser Widget.. In ICWSM. 28. Sean A Munson and Paul Resnick. 2010. Presenting diverse political opinions: how and how much. In In Proc. of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. ACM, 1457–1466. 29. Bing Pan, Helene Hembrooke, Thorsten Joachims, Lori Lorigo, Geri Gay, and Laura Granka. 2007. In Google We Trust: Users’ Decisions on Rank, Position, and Relevance. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 12 (2007), 801–823. Issue 3. Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 431 30. Souneil Park, Seungwoo Kang, Sangyoung Chung, and Junehwa Song. 2009. NewsCube: delivering multiple aspects of news to mitigate media bias. In Proc. ACM CHI. 31. Pew Research 2013. Twitter Reaction to Events Often at Odds with Overall Public Opinion. http://www.pewresearch.org/2013/03/04/twitter- reaction-to-events-often-at-odds-with-overall-public- opinion/. (2013). 32. Matthew Purver and Sylwester Karolina. 2015. Twitter Language Use Reﬂects Psychological Differences between Democrats and Republicans. PLoS ONE 10, 9 (2015), e0137422. 33. Real Clear Politics 2015. RealClearPolitics – Election 2016 – 2016 Republican Presidential Nomination. http://tinyurl.com/us-republican-polling-data. (2015). 34. Christian Sandvig, Kevin Hamilton, Karrie Karahalios, and Cedric Langbort. 2014. Auditing algorithms: Research methods for detecting discrimination on internet platforms. Data and Discrimination: Converting Critical Concerns into Productive Inquiry (2014). 35. Bryan C Semaan, Scott P Robertson, Sara Douglas, and Misa Maruyama. 2014. Social media supporting political deliberation across multiple public spheres: towards depolarization. In In Proc. of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing. ACM, 1409–1421. 36. Naveen Sharma, Saptarshi Ghosh, Fabricio Benevenuto, Niloy Ganguly, and Krishna Gummadi. 2012. Inferring Who-is-Who in the Twitter Social Network. In Proc. ACM WOSN. 37. Laura M Smith, Linhong Zhu, Kristina Lerman, and Zornitsa Kozareva. 2013. The role of social media in the discussion of controversial topics. In Social Computing (SocialCom), 2013 International Conference on. IEEE, 236–243. 38. Latanya Sweeney. 2013. Discrimination in online ad delivery. Queue 11, 3 (2013), 10. 39. Herman Tavani. 2014. Search Engines and Ethics. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (spring 2014 ed.), Edward N. Zalta (Ed.).40. Jaime Teevan, Daniel Ramage, and Merredith Ringel Morris. 2011. #TwitterSearch: a comparison of microblog search and web search. In Proc. ACM WSDM. 41. Elizabeth Van Couvering. 2010. Search engine bias: the structuration of trafﬁc on the World-Wide Web. Ph.D. Dissertation. The London School of Economics and Political Science. 42. Liwen Vaughan and Mike Thelwall. 2004. Search Engine Coverage Bias: Evidence and Possible Causes. Information Processing and Management 40, 4 (May 2004), 693–707. 43. Ingmar Weber, Venkata Rama Kiran Garimella, and Erik Borra. 2012. Mining Web Query Logs to Analyze Political Issues. In Proc. ACM WebSci. 44. Ingmar Weber, Venkata Rama Kiran Garimella, and Asmelash Teka. 2013. Political hashtag trends. In European Conference on Information Retrieval. Springer, 857–860. 45. Michael J. Welch, Junghoo Cho, and Christopher Olston. 2011. Search Result Diversity for Informational Queries. In Proc. WWW. 46. Tae Yano, Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2010. Shedding (a Thousand Points of) Light on Biased Language. In Proc NAACL HLT Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (CSLDAMT). 47. Sarita Yardi and Danah Boyd. 2010. Dynamic debates: An analysis of group polarization over time on twitter. Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society 30, 5 (2010), 316–327. 48. Emine Yilmaz and Javed A. Aslam. 2006. Estimating Average Precision with Incomplete and Imperfect Judgments. In Proc. ACM CIKM. 49. Elad Yom-Tov, Susan Dumais, and Qi Guo. 2013. Promoting Civil Discourse Through Search Engine Diversity. Social Science Computer Review 32 (2013), 145–154. Issue 2. 50. Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil. 2016. Message Impartiality in Social Media Discussions. In Proc. AAAI ICWSM. 51. Daniel Xiaodan Zhou, Paul Resnick, and Qiaozhu Mei. 2011. Classifying the Political Leaning of News Articles and Users from User V otes. In Proc. AAAI ICWSM. Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 432