 Studies in Visual Communication Studies in Visual Communication  Volume 5  Issue 1 Fall 1978 Article 4  1978  The F orms of Caricatur e: Physiognomy and P olitical Bias The F orms of Caricatur e: Physiognomy and P olitical Bias  Mitchel Goldman  Margaret Hagen  Recommended Citation Recommended Citation  Goldman, M., & Hagen, M. (1978). The F orms of Caricatur e: Physiognomy and P olitical Bias. 5 (1), 30-36.  Retrie ved fr om https:/ /reposit ory.upenn.edu/sv c/vol5/iss1/4  This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https:/ /reposit ory.upenn.edu/sv c/vol5/iss1/4  For mor e information, please contact reposit ory@pobo x.upenn.edu .  The F orms of Caricatur e: Physiognomy and P olitical Bias The F orms of Caricatur e: Physiognomy and P olitical Bias  This contents is a vailable in Studies in Visual Communication: https:/ /reposit ory.upenn.edu/sv c/vol5/iss1/4  THE FORMS OF CARICATURE: PHYSIOGNOMY  AND POLITICAL BIAS1  MITCHEL GOLDMAN and MARGARET HAGEN  The analysis oftechniques of caricature as a system of  communication for transmitting information about picto­ rial s·ubjects has in the past remained primarily the  province of artists and their historian s, for example,  Ashbee (1928), Lynch (1927), Berger (1952), and Rother  (1966). More recently, however, perceptual psychologists  interested in the history and function of art have turned  their attention to the psychological mechanisms which  must underlie the successful perception of the caricatured  subject. Gombrich (1961) has stressed the role of the  creative imagination of the observer in the successful  perception of caricatures, while E. J. Gibson (1969) and J.  J. Gibson (1954, 1971) have emphasized the crucial role  of the information about the subject carried by the  caricature itself. J. J. Gibson (1954) argued that caricature  was a combination of the techniques of geometric projec­ tion and artistic convention. He wrote that it was neces­ sary for the artist to go beyond the projective information  about the subject given in the light coming to the eye and  to impose certain agreed upon conventions of exaggera­ tion and distortion in the production of a successful  caricature. However, Gibson revised this original formu­ lation in a later definition of "picture": "A picture is a  surface so treated that a delimited optic array to a point of  observation is made available which contains the same  kind of information that is found in the ambient optic  arrays of an ordinary environment" (1971 :31).  Of course, Gibson is referring here only to representa­ tive art, to art whose object is the recognizable depiction  of objects and scenes from the natural environment.  Clearly his definition of pictures excludes the very large  class of nonrepresentative, or abstract, art and, indeed, is  not even intended to account for all the variables which  determine the aesthetic character of a work of art. The  purpose of the definition is simply to establish the nature  of the optical correspondence between representative  pictures and the scenes they depict. The concept of  information central to the above definition is Gibson's  (1966) major subject matter.  Mitchel Goldman is a recent graduate of Boston Univer­ sity. He wrote this paper as a distinction work senior  honors thesis at Boston University under the supervision  of Dr. Margaret Hagen. Dr. Hagen is an Assistant Pro­ fessor of Psychology at Boston University whose research  interest focuses on problems in the area of visual percep­ tion, particularly the development of pictorial perception. THE SENSES CONSIDERED AS PERCEPTUAL SYSTEMS  In general, J. J. Gibson has defined optical informa­ tion about an object as the formless and timeless invari­ ants in the structure of an optic array that specify the dis­ tinctive features of the object. E. J. Gibson (1969) has dealt  extensively with the concept of distinctive features, which  she defines as invariant relations that specify a particular  object and allow for its discrimination from a field of  similar objects. Distinctive features are relations, ratios,  proportions , and gradients which remain invariant across  specified sets of transformation. Thus, in this theory, a  caricature is successful to the extent that it preserves the  distinctive features essential to the discrimination of the  particular subject across the exaggeration distortion trans­ formation s of caricature. This concept of invariant infor­ mation or features preserved across transformations is  clearly adapted from geometry and has been formalized  by J. J. Gibson in his theory of ecological optics.  Invariant Features in Caricature  Perkins (1974) was the first psychologist to begin an  analysis of the techniques of caricature within the  framework of the theory described above. He hypoth­ esized that caricature recognition is identical to the  process of ordinary facial recognition and that caricatures  must therefore contain the same attributes as the carica­ tured face itself or photographs of the subject. On the  other hand, as Worth (1977) observed, one might argue  that there are grammars and conventions of caricature  recognition that are different from those of facial recogni­ tion in real life. That is, it may be the case that recognizing  pictures demands some of the properties we need to  recognize objects in real life, but it may also demand  many other things. Still, Perkins's hypothesis that feature  correspondence between picture and subject is the core  of successful facial recognition in caricatures can be  tested by the straightforward process of looking at existing  caricatures and their subjects. This is exactly what Perkins  did. Through informal observation of caricatures and  photos of Richard M. Nixon and through the deletion of  various facial attributes from those pictures, Perkins found  that the four key properties of caricatures of Nixon's face  were jowls, a hairline with bays on either side, a box chin,  and a long nose. The omission of these properties or a  contraindication of any one seriously degraded the repre­ sentative character of a caricature. If Perkins is right about  the criticat nature of these facial properties for the success  of a caricature , it should follow t,hat (1) all artists generally  use what Perkins calls "the rather necessary" key prop­ erties and thus are consistent among themselves in the  nature of their depictions; (2) that any individual artist  should be consistent in his depiction across time; and (3)  that changes over time in the form of the caricature should  be a function of changes in the face itself.  The present authors, while acknowledging the insight­ ful and provocative nature of Perkins's exploratory inves­ tigation of caricature, take issue with several aspects of his  30 STUDIES IN THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF VISUAL COMMUNICATION  analysis. First, Perkins has quite freely taken liberties with  the concepts of invariants across transformation postu­ lated by the Gibsons. He chooses to speak of "individuat­ ing 'properties ' or 'attributes' of the face," a translation  which we feel may well do violence to the essential  relational component of distinctive features. Considera­ tion of faces in terms of feature ratios would more truly  have retained the flavor of the relational concept. Second,  Perkins offers no objective analysis of the data, and the  reader is left to rely on Perkins's own informal observa­ tions. Third, Perkins provides no objective evidence con­ cerning the influence of the individual stylistic bias of the  caricaturist. Finally, in analyzing how the requirement of  recognition influences caricature, he does not address  another important issue: how the political climate also  exerts an influence.  An Empirical Study of Caricature  In consideration of these points, the purpose of the  present investigation was to carry out a systematic empiri­ cal test of the hypotheses which follow from Perkins's  argument , with particular attention to the hypothesis of  consistency within a single artist and that of consistency  across artists and time. We wished to test two aspects of  consistency: consistency in specific features chosen for  exaggeration and consistency in degree of exaggeration.  We hypothesized that any single artist would be consis­ tent with himself, that artists would not be consistent with  one other because of variable sty I istic bias, and that there  would be a lack of consistency across time as a function  of shifting political climate. By shifting political climate  we mean variation in the degree to which a public figure  is evaluated positively and negatively by the public and  by the media. Richard Nixon provides a very clear  example of a public figure who experienced an increas­ ingly negative political climate from his election to the  denouement of Watergate. So, like Perkins, we have  selected caricatures and photographs of Nixon as our data  base. This choice will also facilitate comparisons between  Perkins's work and the present investigation. Also, we  have chosen as our units feature ratios of property mag­ nitude rather than single properties.  The data for the consistency analysis were obtained in  the following manner. Five photographs of Nixon from  1973 were measured by two independent judges, and  eleven mean feature ratios were obtained, such as length  of jowl/vertical head dimension (Perkins's jowl property) ,  width of jowl/length of jowl (box chin), and length of  nose/vertical face dimension (long nose). (See Figure 1 for  a full presentation of feature ratios.) The particular feature  ratios chosen do not exhaust the possibilities but were  selected because they seemed to represent obvious can­ didates for distinctive features and were easily measured.  (The larger of the two dimensions was always the  numerator.)  The interjudge correlation for these measurements was  extremely high (r = . 99). Then, through a search of news  and political magazines and periodicals from 1973, 100  caricatures from 1 7 artists were obtained. The only con-Figure 1 -Cover photograph of Richard M. Nixon  with measured feature magnitudes indicated by bars.  (Newsweek, july 23, 1973.)  straints on selection were clarity of reproduction and  measurability in terms of size. From these 100 caricatures,  one caricature was randomly selected for each of the  seventeen artists. The eleven feature ratios were again  obtained for each drawing. For each feature ratio in every  caricature a deviance score was obtained, expressed as  the percent deviance from the mean photographic ratio.  Thus, if the caricatured feature ratio of width of jowl/  length of jowl equaled the mean photograph ratio, the  deviance score for this ratio for this drawing was 0  percent. Then, for each artist the 11 feature ratios were  ranked from 1 to 11 in terms of least to most deviance  from the photographed ratios. These data are tabulated in  Table 1. In order to illustrate the technique, we will take  the first artist, Cummings, as an example. As one can see  from the table, Cummings modified the relation length of  nose/length of jowl least of all in his drawing, relative to  the magnitude of the relation measured in photographs of  Nixon. Thus this relation is assigned a rank of one (1 ). On  the other hand, the relation length of jowl/width of jowl  was distorted to the greatest extent in the drawing relative  to the photograph, thus receiving the rank of eleven (11 ).  This procedure was followed for all the feature ratios for  all the artists.  31  TABLE 1  RANKS OF DEVIANCE OF FEATURE RATIOS  FROM MEAN PHOTOGRAPHIC RATIOS, BY ARTIST  Feature Ratios  Artist Vert. Head Vert. Head Len. Nose Len. Nose Len. Jowl Len. Nose Vert. Head Len. Nose Vert. Head Vert. Head Vert. Head  Len. Nose Len. Jowl Len. Fore. Len. Ear Wid. Jowl Eye Eye Len. Fore. Len. Jowl Wid. Fore. Len. Ear Eye Eye  1. Cummings 9 10 5 8 11  2. Behrendt 11 10 9 7 3  3. Marlitte 9 11 10 6 2  4. Whitte 11 10 9 8 4  5. Staskyl 10 7 9 8 11  6. Oliphant 9 10 7 8 11  7. Herblock 9 8 7 9 11  8. Wright 5 11 10 9 6  9. Lurie 8 3 7 5 11  10. Simpson 10 11 8 9 5  11. Hill 11 3 8 10 9  12. Engle 10 11 9 8 4  13. Davis 4 10 2 5 3  14. Haynie 10 4 9 8 11  15. Fisher 10 7 9 8 11  16. Scrawls 11 10 9 8 5  17. Sanders 11 9 10 8 3  Mean Ranks 9.4 8.6 8.1 7.7 7.3  Statistical Analysis  Three types of analysis were performed with these rank  data. First, a Kendall coefficient of concordance was  computed, w = 0.597, X2(1 0) = 101.43, p < .001, indi­ cating a very high degree of consistency among artists in  terms of which feature ratios are chosen for exaggeration.  Second, a Friedman analysis of variance for ranked data  was performed and F = 83.13, p < .001, indicating that  the mean ranks for feature ratios differ significantly from  chance ranking. Last, in order to isolate which feature  ratios differed significantly from one another in rank, a  parametric analysis of variance with multiple post hoc  comparisons was performed. The main effect for rank was  significant, F(1 0, 170) = 19.2, p < .02. Newman-Keuls  post hoc comparisons indicated that of the 55 possible  comparisons among feature ratios in terms of rank, 31 of  these comparisons differed from one another in rank with  p < .OS at least. This very high number of significant  differences is another indication of the high level of  consistency among artists in their selection of which  features to caricaturize.  Interpretation of the Analysis  The three types of analysis allow us to conclude several  things about our consistency hypotheses. First, we have  shown that there is a very high level of agreement from  artist to artist in terms of which feature ratios are to be  distorted in the caricatures. Generally speaking, a feature  ratio greatly distorted by one artist will also be greatly  distorted by the others, and a ratio little modified by one  artist is relatively untouched b~' the others. Of course this 7 6 1 3 4 2  8 6 5 2 4 1  7 8 1 4 3 5  7 6 1 3 5 2  5 6 1 3 4 2  6 4.5 1 2 4.5 3  6 3 1 4 5 2  4 8 3 2 7 1  10 1 9 4 2 6  7 3 2 4 6 1  6 2 7 5 4 1  7 6 1 5 3 2  9 7 11 6 1 8  7 3 5 2 1 6  6 5 4 1 3 2  7 6 4 2 3 1  7 5 6 4 2 1  6.8 4.9 3.6 3.4 3.4 2.7  is not true in each and every case, but statistically the  level of agreement is overwhelmingly significant. Second,  we have shown that the relative degree to which a  particular feature ratio is distorted in caricatures is very  stable from artist to artist. Individual feature ratios tend to  stay in the same ranked position as one goes from artist to  artist. The most distorted tends to remain the most dis­ torted, the least, the least, and those ratios in between  tend to maintain constant positions in the ranking. Al­ though this is but another way of saying there is very high  agreement among artists, the interpretation goes even  further: The agreement across artists on what to distort  even extends to this finer level of analysis of individual  feature relations.  INDIVIDUAL FACIAL FEATURES  A comparison of high-and low-ranked feature ratios  also allows for the specification of feature as independent  from feature ratio as the source of exaggeration. It should  be noted, however, that the specification of a particular  feature as a source of distortion always implies underlying  feature ratios. That is, a long nose is long only with respect  to other dimensions of the face. A long nose will stand out  as a feature per se, rather than a component of a ratio,  only if it functions in multiple ratios as a source of  high-ranked deviance. Comparisons of pairs of feature  ratio ranks provide support for Perkins's argument that the  jowls and nose function as major distorted features with  good consistency across artists. When these two features  occur in the same ratio, the ranked deviance from the  photograph is very small (3.6), but when either occurs in  32 STUDIES IN THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF VISUAL COMMUNICATION  conjunction with another minor feature, such as the  vertical dimension of the head, the feature ratio deviance  rank is very high (jowls/head 8.6; nose/head 9.4). That  this is not due to increase or decrease in the vertical  dimension of the head is evident from the low ranks  occupied by other ratios with this dimension such as  eye-eye/vertical head = 2.7 and length ear/vertical  head = 3.5. Such pair comparisons, as well as the three  convergent analyses for consistency, provide consider­ able evidence in support of Perkins's general argument for  consistency among artists in terms of features chosen for  caricature. It should be noted, however, that while there is  significant agreement among artists about what to exag­ gerate there is little agreement about how much to exag­ gerate. Mean percent deviance from photographed ratios  is 53 percent but the means for individual artists range  from 12 percent for Davis to 86 percent for Fisher.  Presumably such variability is due to the artists' individual  bias and style.  Statistical Analysis  The related questions of consistency within an artist's  work and across time were addressed by similar types of  analysis. For these types the data base was generated by  multiple caricatures done by five prolific artists in 1972  and 1973. The five artists were selected solely on the basis  of relative frequency of published drawings observed in  the initial sampling of 17 artists (see Figure 2). They were  Oliphant, with seventeen drawings; Herblock, with nine;  Wright, with twelve; Lurie, with ten; and Haynie, with  five. For each of these five artists for both years, mean  percent deviance from photographs was computed and  ranks assigned to the features ratio from 1 to 11 for least  to most deviance. To address the question of self-consis­ tency, Spearman rank order correlation coefficients were  calculated for each of the five artists and the following  rho values were obtained: Oliphant: r = .964,  t(1 0) = 1 0.8. p < .001; Herblock: r = .75, t(9) = 3.4,  p < .01; Wright: r = .855, t(9) = 4.94, p < .001; Lurie:  r = .44, t ( 9) = 1 .48, p < . 1 0; Haynie : r = . 9 7,  t(9) = 12.6, p < .001. Thus, of the five artists tested, four  showed significant correlations between 1972 and 1973  rank orders for feature ratio distortions, p < .05. Only  Lurie failed to show this significant correlation. Con­ sequently, grouped mean ranks for 1972 and 1973 also  are positively correlated, p = .957, p < .01, reflecting  consistency of treatment from year to year. However,  whereas the rank orders of feature ratios, in terms of  relative degree of deviance from photographed ratios, are  highly correlated between 1972 and 1973, the absolute  size of the percent deviance or distortion increases from  1972 to 1973. Of the eleven feature ratios listed, only one  does not change. Of the ten that change nine increase in  distortion relative to the photographed ratios, and only  one decreases. The results would occur by chance with  p = < .011, so this nearly uniform increase in distortion  reflects a very real change in degree of caricature. In order  to test the significance of the magnitude of this change, a  t-test was performed on percent of distortion of each feature ratio by year relative to photographs from the two  years, and t = 3.18, p = < .01. The mean percent distor­ tion for 1972 was 56 percent; for 1973, 61 percent. Thus  the increase noted in the sign test is also a significant  increase measured parametrically, that is, not only the  directionality of the changes but their size is also signifi­ cantatp = < .01.  Interpretation of the Analysis  The analysis reported above allows for the following  conclusions: First, we have shown that four of the five  artists tested were very consistent from year to year in  terms of which feature ratios they chose to distort. Be­ cause only Lurie was inconsistent from 1972 to 1973, the  group as a whole shows consistency from year to year.  Second, we also reached some conclusions about what  changes from year to year as well as about what remains  the same. We have shown that the choice of what to  exaggerate is quite constant across artists and across time,  but we have also shown that the degree of distortion  varies considerably from artist to artist and from year to  year. We found that the mean degree of distortion varies  from 12 percent for Davis to 86 percent for Fisher. In  addition, when we looked at all five selected artists  together, we found that of the ten mean feature ratios  which changed from 1972 to 1973, nine of them in­ creased in the degree of distortion relative to photographs.  This increase in distortion could be due either to  alteration in political climate (which underwent a very  rapid change vis-a-vis Nixon from 1972 to 1973) or to real  physical changes in Nixon's face due to aging, strain, or  fatigue. In order to control for the effect of this type of  change, photographs from both 1972 and 1973 were  measured and compared for physical change in feature  ratio. Of the nine feature ratios which increased in the  caricatures from 1972 to 1973, only three were observed  to change in photographs-the three involving jowl  length. Measurements of photographs indicate a 30 per­ cent increase in jowl length from early 1972 to 1973. It  may be argued, however, that this finding still leaves the  six jowlless feature ratios, which increased in distortion  from 1972 to 1973, a function of increasingly negative  political climate rather than of real changes in Nixon's  face. Thus this result runs counter to any simplistic  assumptions about caricature as a function of true facial  features. The finding with respect to jowl size, however,  shows that artists are also very sensitive to real changes in  the subject's features.  SUMMARY  The present investigation undertook an empirical  analysis of several of the consistency assumptions which  seemed to follow from Perkins's model of the caricature  process. We looked at the question of consistency of  distorted features in the work of 1 7 artists during 1972 and  found a very high degree of concordance among artists in  33  Time, July 30, 1973  ~You're My Boy'·  (5) HPrblock In Wa~hlngton Post Newsweek, May 7, 1973 34  Figure 2 -Caricatures of Richard M. Nixon, 1973.  @  LURIE  ewsweek, June 25, 1973  ·~?%~  ~-:. ' _:.~  • • > ~  . ··:~ .:d  '··":·,:· ·~,~  ... ··.-:  Oliphant © 197 3 Denver Post  A question of priorities: :P.fore for the Pentagon, less for the poor?  sweek, February 12, 1973  Haynle--Loulsv!Ue COurler...Journal  Newsweek, November 12, 1973  35  terms of which feature ratios were most and least dis­ torted. However, with regard to degree of exaggeration of  feature ratio, we observed very great discrepancies among  artists, ranging from 12 percent distortion to 86 percent,  J$< with a mean of 53 percent-rhus we wish to argue that the  ' choice of what to caricature is determined largely by  characteristics of the subject's face, while the degree of  caricature is determined by the individual artist's style and  bias. Of course, our analysis addresses this important  question of artists' styles in a simplistic fashion. We  looked at degree of distortion only as it distinguishes one  artist from another. It is perfectly clear that there are many  other factors which determine the particular style charac­ terizing an artist, and we have no wish to reduce such  complexity to the single dimension of degree of distor­ tion; other features of style are simply beyond the scope of  this study. We also looked at the question of consistency  across time. When features ranked for degree of distortion  were compared for the period 1972-1973, the rank corre­ lation was very high and significant, indicating great  consistency across time in choice of features to be  exaggerated. However, when we again looked at degree  of distortion across time, we found that real physical  changes in the subject's face could not account for the  significant increase in the degree of distortion observed  from 1972 to 1973. We feel strongly that this increase in  distortion was largely a function of the increased negativ­ ity of the political climate surrounding Nixon in 1973. It is  not possible, of course, to directly test this conclusion, but  an indirect method has been suggested by Worth (1977).  If our reasoning is correct, that an increasingly negative  political opinion increases the degree of distortion in  caricatures of a subject, then the opposite of this reason­ ing should also be true. That is, as the political climate  around some public figure becomes increasingly positive,  the degree of distortion in caricatures of the subject  should decrease and be, at least in principle, testable.  We also do not wish to appear to be arguing that simple  exaggeration of feature ratios is all there is to caricature. If  this were true, then increased distortion would be the  unique and inevitable result of increased negativity of  public opinion, which it is not. As Worth (1977) rightly  observed, it might also be noted that by the end of World  War 11, all one needed to caricature Hitler was one  diagonal line and one horizontal line underneath, and  everyone understood the representation of the hair and  the mustache. This increasing economy of line as a  function of familiarity cannot be accounted for by the  above hypothesis. At the same time it is not clear that  increasing economy runs counter to increasing distortion.  It may be that the two processes are parallel in time or, more likely, that the generalized increase in distortion  precedes the selection of the most economical depiction.  Again, the answer to this question is beyond the scope of  this article, but it does seem that caricatures of Hitler  would offer fertile ground for investigating the issue.  In conclusion, then, we found support for Perkins's  analysis of the process of caricature as primarily a func­ tion of true physiognomy but wish to offer, in addition to  his analysis, our evidence for the very important role  played by political climate, personal bias, and style.  Acknowledgment . The authors wish to thank David Perkins for his  kind assistance in preparation of the manuscript. Any errors which  remain in interpretation of his position or data analysis are solely the  responsibility of the present authors.  NOTE  , This research was supported in part by a grant from the National  Institute of Mental Health to the second author, #1 R01 MH27947-0 .  Requests for reprints should be sent to the second author at 64  Cummington Street, Department of Pyschology, Boston University,  Boston, MA 02215.  REFERENCES CITED  Ashbee, C. R.  1928 Caricature. New York: Scribner's.  Berger, 0.  1952 My Victims: How to Caricature. New York: Harper  Brothers.  Gibson, E. j.  1969 Principles of Perceptual Learning and Development. New  York: Meredith.  Gibson, j. J.  1954 A Theory of Pictorial Perception . Audio-Visual Communica­ tion Review 1 (13).  1966 The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. Boston:  Houghton-Miff! in.  1971 The Information Available in Pictures. Leonardo 4(27).  Gombrich , E. H.  1961 Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial  Representation. Princeton: Princeton University Press.  Lynch, B.  1927 A History of Caricature. Boston: Little, Brown.  Perkins, D.  1974 A Definition of Caricature and Caricature and Recognition.  Studies in the Anthropology of Visual Communication. 2(1): 1-23.  Rother, E.  1966 Drawing Caricatures. Design 67(4).  Worth, S.  1977 Private communication to the author.  36 STUDIES IN THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF VISUAL COMMUNICATION 